Case No: C.A.2613/2016
Case Title: Muhammad Rafiq v. Mst. Ghulam Zoharan Mai & another
Subject: Suit for Declaration/.
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa
Judgment Date: 17-03-2023
Upload Date: 29-03-2023
Citations: 2023 SCMR 988
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 93
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.a._2613_2016.pdf

[1] order dated 03.11.2016 of the Lahore High Court, Multan Bench passed in Civil Revision No. 331 -D/2013) Muhammad Rafiq. …Appellant Versus Mst. Ghulam Zoharan Mai & another. …Respondents For the Appellant (s) : Raja Inaam Ameen Minhas, ASC. a/w Appellant. For Respondent No. 1 Respondent No. 2 : : Mr. Tahir Mehmood, ASC .

[2] Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR. Ex-parte . Date of Hearing : 17.03.2023 JUDGMENT Qazi Faez Isa , J. The learned counsel for the appellant state s that the High Court had allowed the Civil Revision without appreciating that gift of land in favour of the appellant was made through a registered gift deed dated 21 April 1993 by his father, namely , Ghulam Muhammad, therefore, the impugned judgment is not sustainable.

[3] By referr ing to exhibit P 1 he states that this document was sufficient to establish the g ift by the donor , Ghulam Muhammad , in favour of the donee (appellant herein) and the suit filed by the daughter and widow of Ghulam Muhammad (respondents herein) was misconceived . He submits that after the execution of e xhibit P1, and on its basis, the gif t was also recorded in the revenue records vide gift mutation No. 442, attested on 6 January 2008, therefore, the respondents should have arrayed the revenue authority of Tehsil Dunyapur, District Lodhran, where the land was situated, as a party to the sui t, which was a necessary requirement of the law.

[4] He further states that since the plaintiffs had alleged fraud particular s of the fraud had to be provided , which was not done . It is next contended that the suit was not filed 4-Civil Appeal No.2613 of 2016 (1).doc - 2 - during the lifetime of Ghulam M uhammad, and was filed beyond the prescribed period of three years. 2.

[5] We have heard the learned counsel, read the impugned judgment and examined the referred to documents . Exhibit P1 purports to be a photocopy of the register maintained by the sub- registrar of Lodhran. Primary evidence of the gift deed , purportedly executed by Ghulam Muhammad , would be the gift deed itself, but it was not produced .

[6] Exhibit P1 also does not constitute secondary evidence , which would have been a certified copy of the gift deed, but this too was not produced . Significantly, neither the gift deed (primary evidence) nor a certified copy thereof (secondary evidence) was produced and i nstead a photocopy of the sub -registrar’s register was produced, and on this the appellant ’s claim of the purported gift was based .

[7] Incidentally, neither the sub-registrar nor any officer/official from his office was produced /summoned by the appellant to testify that the photocopy which was produced was a true/certified copy from the said register. The appellant did not produce any tangible evidence of the purported gift, let alone to have establish ed it. 3.

[8] Upon death the estate of a deceased person devolves upon his/her legal heirs. In this case, the legal heirs of Ghulam Muhammad were his widow, son and daughter. Since the alleged gift was denied, it was for the beneficiary thereof (the appellant ) to have establish ed it. However, the appellant failed to establish the gift in his favour .

[9] And, on the basis of a document which had no legal significan ce the appellant sought to deprive his mother and sister of their inheritance . Shares in the i nheritance of a Muslim deceased are prescribed in the Holy Quran.1 Twenty years have passed since the death of Ghulam Muhammad during which time his widow (respon dent No. 2 ) passed away.

[10] In depriving the other legal heirs t he appellant acted dishonestly , illegally and violated Qur’anic injunctions . 4. As regards the contention of the learned counsel representing the appellant that the particulars of the alleged fraud 1 Al-Qur’an, Surah An -Nisa (4) verses 11 to 14 and 176. 4-Civil Appeal No.2613 of 2016 (1).doc - 3 - were not provided, and that fraud was not established is not a valid argument .

[11] It was for the beneficiary of the gift, who was the appellant , to have establish ed it. The appellant did not produce the gift deed or its copy , let alone establish the purpo rted gift in his favour . What t he appellant did , is what we have often noted on the part of some male heir s, which is to depriv e female heirs of their inheritance , which constitutes fraud. 5.

[12] With regard to the contention that a gift mutation entry was made in the revenue record , which constituted independent evidence , this is a fallacious argument. If the revenue authority had chang ed the revenue record on the basis of exhibit P1 they did not act in accordance with the law .2 They also did not issue notice s to the heirs of Ghulam Muhammad to consider any objection that they may have had.

[13] To have acted on the basis of a purported extract from the sub -registrar’s register and to have changed the revenue record on this basis was not permissible . If revenue officers/officials do not abide by the law governing them they can be taken to task for transgressing the law . The appellant fraud ulently deprived the legal heirs of their share in the inheritance and then sought to reinforce the fraud by getting the revenue record changed and this was facilitat ed by the land revenue authority.

[14] T he suffering of the respondents was perpetuated by officialdom . 6. We now attend to the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that since cancellation of gift mutation No . 442, attested on 6 January 2008, by the revenue authority of Tehsil Dunyapur, District Lodhran was also sought the respondents had to array the said revenue authority as a defendant .

[15] The plaintiffs (respondents herein) were not obliged to array the said authority nor were obliged to produce/ summon any officer/official of it as a witness because the respondents had denied the gift and did not rely upon the said gift mutation . It was t he appellant who relied upon the purported gift and the said gift mutatio n, therefore, he had to establish the same .

[16] And, it was for him to have produced/summoned the concerned officer/official from the sub - 2 Land Revenue Act, 1967, section 42. 4-Civil Appeal No.2613 of 2016 (1).doc - 4 - registrar’s office and from the revenue authority , which he did not do. The objection to the belated filing of the suit is also not maintainable as the plaintiffs had stated recent knowledge and denial by the appellant and the appellant had failed to controvert this. 7.

[17] The appellant deprived his mother and sister from their inheritance. Many females do not have the wherewit hal to approach the courts to obtain their rights . Those like the respondents that do , suffer , and often have to wait for years , to get what was rightfully theirs to begin with . The appellant proceed ed on the assumption , like some male heirs do, that even if they eventually lose the case they would still get the usufruct of the land by illegally retain ing its possession over the years spent in litigation . 8.

[18] This appeal should never hav e been filed and we have no hesitation in dismiss ing it, and do so with costs throughout . We also impose special costs in the amount of Rs.500,000 (five hundred thousand rupees) on the appellant as the defence taken by him was vexatious and false .3 Costs to be paid by the appellant to the surviving respondent.

[19] If costs are no t paid the same shall be recovered as arrears of land revenue from the appellant, and till costs are paid they shall continue to constitute a charge on the estate of the appellant. 9. Before parting with this judgment, we would want to say that learned counsel should reflect on how best to advise his clients , and not become an instrument to perpetuate injustice.

[20] Copy of this judgment be sent to the land revenue authority of Tehsil Dunyapur , District Lodhran and to the Senior Member, Board of Revenue, Punja b. Judge Islamabad 17.03.2023 Approved for Reporting Rabbani*/ Judge 3 Section 35 -B of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.