Case No: C.A.1621/2017
Case Title: Federation of Pakistan thr. M/o Defense v. Mrs. Ajmal Samia (decd) thr. her LRs & others
Subject: Suit for Declaration/Ownership
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa
Judgment Date: 11-01-2023
Upload Date: 13-01-2023
Citations: PLD 2023 SC 183
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 18
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.a._1621_2017.pdf

[1] ORDER The appel lant in this case is the Federation of Pakistan and is represented by Raja Shafqat Abbasi , learned Deputy Attorney -General (‘DAG’). Learned DAG commenced his arguments but basic facts were not enumerated precisely . Therefore, we wanted to se nd for the Attorney-General for Pakistan so that h e could come and render proper assistance .

[2] However, on enquiring who the Attorney -General is, we were not given a satisfactory answer to what is a simple query. We then called upon Chaudhry Aamir Rehman, learned Additiona l CA  etc 2 Attorney -General , present in Court , to answer our query and he said he was unable to . It transpires that Mr.

[3] Ashtar Ausaf Ali resigned from the post of Attorney -General a couple of months back and in his st ead no one has been appointed till date despi te lapse of more than a reasonable period . 2. Article 100 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan (‘the Constitution ’) stipulates that : ‘100. (1) The President shall appoint a person, being a person qualified to be appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court, to be the Attorney -General for Pakistan. (2) The Attorney -General shall hold office during the pleasure of the President and shall not engage in private practice so long as he holds the office of the Attorney -General. (3) It shall be the dut y of the Attorney -General to give advice to the Federal Government upon such legal matters, and to perform such other duties of a legal character, as may be referred or assigned to him by the Federal Government, and in the performance of his duties he shal l have the right of audience in all courts and tribunals in Pakistan. (4) The Attorney -General may, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office. ’ 3.

[4] The Attorney -General for Pakistan is a constitutional post and it cannot be left vacant. There is no mention of a n acting Attorney - General in the Constitution. The law also requires notice to the Attorney -General under Order XXVIIA of the Code of Civil Procedure (and not to a DAG or Additional Attorney -General) in certain cases .

[5] Neither a DAG nor an Additional Attorney -General is a substitute for the Attorney -General. We may also assume that when a DAG or an Additional Attorney -General attends Court he/she does so on instructions received from the Attorney -General. 4. Therefore, the AGP (whoever that may be) and the Federal Law Secretary should be in attendance on the next date.

[6] CA  etc 3 5. We also expect to be properly assisted on the next date of hearing. Judge Judge ISLAMABAD 11th January 2023 Mudassar / ‘Approved For Reporting’