Case No: C.A.297/2014
Case Title: Election Commission of Pakistan thr. its Secretary v. Province of Punjab thr. its Chief Secretary & others
Subject: Election/Delimitation of Constituencies
Judge: MR. JUSTICE TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, HCJ
Judgment Date: 19-03-2014
Upload Date: 11-04-2014
Citations: PLD 2014 SC 463
SC Citations: 2014 SCP 33
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/ca.297_2014.pdf

[1] ORDER TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, CJ .- We have heard learned counsel for the appellant, for the r espondents, learned Advocate General Punjab and learned Attorney General for Pakistan. CIVIL APPEAL NO. 297 OF 2014 2 2. For reasons to be recorded later in the detailed judgment, we hold, declare and direct as under: - i) that the power to hold elections of the Local Government stand vested in the Election Commission of Pakistan in terms of Article 140A of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan .

[2] The Election Commission of Pakistan has been mandated to “organize and conduct the election and to make such arrangements as are nec essary to ensure that the election is conducted honestly, justly, fairly and in accordance with law, and that corrupt practices are guarded against ” (Article 218(3) of the Constitution); ii) that Sections 8 to 10 of the Punjab Local Government Act, 2013 and the relevant Rules framed there -under are ultra vires of the Constitution in so far as they empower the Provincial Government to carry out the delimitation of the constituencies for the Local Government; iii) that since the delimitation of constituen cies of the Local Government is part of the process of organizing and holding elections honestly, justly and fairly which is the Constitutional mandate of the Election Commission of Pakistan, the power to carry out such delimitation should vest with the El ection Commission of Pakistan; iv) that since the holding of election of Local Government has been delayed for more than nine years, which is CIVIL APPEAL NO. 297 OF 2014 3 violative of the Constitutional command, we are persuaded to direct the Government s, Federal and Provincial ( of Punjab ) to carry out appropriate amendments / legislation to empower the Election Commission of Pakistan to initiate and carry out the process of delimitation of constituencies for the Local Government Elections .

[3] This exercise should be completed within a period of five months from today and the Election Commission of Pakistan shall thereafter take requisite measures to carry out the process of delimitation of constituencies for the Local Government expeditiously so as to complete the same within a period o f 45 days of the enactment/amendments in laws in terms of this order.

[4] The Election Commission of Pakistan shall further ensure that the announcement of election schedule and the process of holding it is complete by or before 15th of November, 2014. 3. The appeal stand s disposed of in terms noted above. CHIEF JUSTICE JUDGE JUDGE Islamabad, the 19th of March, 2014 Approved For Reporting Khurram