Case No: C.A.142/2019
Case Title: Zulfiqar Ali Bhatti v. Election Commission of Pakistan & others
Subject: Election-National Assembly/Others
Judge: Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah
Judgment Date: 02-11-2022
Upload Date: 09-09-2023
Citations: 2024 SCMR 997
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 278
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.a._142_2019.pdf

[1] order (notification) dated 18.01.2019, of the Election Commission of Pakistan) Civil Petition No.1369 of 2019 (Against the order of the Islamabad High Court, dated 15.02.2019, passed in W.P. No. ) Zulfiqar Ali Bhatti ...…. Appellant Versus Election Commission of Pakistan and others ……. Respondent s For the appellant : Mr.

[2] Shahzad Shaukat, ASC. For respondent No.1: Mr. Muhammad Arshad, DG Law. (Election Commission) For respondent No.6: Mian Abdul Rauf, ASC. (Amir Sultan C heema) Mr. Mubeen -ud-Din Qazi, ASC. Date of hearing: 02.11 .2022 JUDGMENT Syed Mansoor Ali Shah , J.- The question before us, in the present case, is whether the Election Commission of Pakistan has the power to order a re-poll in one or more polling stations or in the whole constituency , under Article 218(3) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan 1973 read with Section 8(c) or Section 9(1) of the Elections Act 2017 , on the ground of tampering made with the election record (polling bag s, ballot papers , etc.) after the consolidation of the final result of the poll by the Returning Officer under Section 95 and the publication of the name of the returned candi date in the official gazette under Section 98 of the Elections Act 2017. 2.

[3] The background facts of the case in which the said question has arisen for our consideration are that Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhatti (“appellant”) and Mr. Amir Sultan Cheema (“respondent ”), along with several other candidates , contested the general election of 2018 f or the membership of the National Assembly of Pakistan from the cons tituency CA-, etc 2 of NA 91 Sargodha –IV.

[4] In the poll held on 25 -07-2018, t he appellant secured 1 ,10,654 votes and the respondent 1,10,567 votes. The respondent made an application , on 27.07.2018, to the Returning O fficer for recount ing the votes, under S ection 95(5) of the Election s Act 2017 (“Elections Act”) . The Returning Officer dismissed the application on 29.07. 2018 and consolidated the final result of the poll on that day .

[5] On 30.07. 2018 , the respondent filed a petition before the Election Commiss ion of Pakistan (“Election Commission”) for setting aside the order of the Returning Officer and accepting his application for recounting the votes. The Election Commission, by its order dated 31.07.2018, dispose d of the respondent’s petition while direct ing him to approach the appropriate forum (Election Tribunal) through an election petition, for the redress al of his grievance.

[6] The respondent , however, challenged the orders of the Returning O fficer and the Election Commission in the Lahore High Court through a writ petition. The High Court allowed the writ petition on 03.08.2018, set aside the order of the Returning Officer and directed the Returning Officer to undertake the recount of the vot es in the polling stations to be indicated by the respondent.

[7] The appellant challenged the order of the High Court in this Court through a petition for leave to appeal. This Court, vide its order dated 10.08.2018, granted the leave, suspended the operation of the impugned order and directed the Election Commission to issue the notification of the appellant as a returned candidate , which was issued on the same day .

[8] Given the issuance of the said notification, t he respondent filed the election petition before the Election Tribunal, on 19.09.2018. However, d uring the pendency of the election petition, this Court disposed of the appeal of the appellant vide a consent order dated 10.10.2018, directing the Returning Officer to recount the votes of the whole constituency and submit a report of the recount to the Election Commission. 3.

[9] In the course of the proceedings of t he recount, the Returning O fficer found that the election record (seals of gunny bags and poling bags, and stamps on ballot papers) of 20 p olling stations had been tampered with, after the consolidation of the final result of the poll. He, therefore, declined to consolidate the result of the recount and repor ted the matter to the Election C ommission vide his report dated 30.11.2018.

[10] He also advised the respondent to approach the Election T ribunal where his election petition was then sub judice . On the report of the Returning CA-, etc 3 Officer , the Election Commission constituted a Technical Inquiry Committee on 10 .12.2018, to carry out the r equisite “F act Finding Inquiry”.

[11] The Inquiry C ommittee, in its report dated 09 .01.2019 , endorsed the fact reported by the Returning Officer regarding tampering with the election record . On the basis of the report of the Inquiry Committee, the Election Commission made an order on 14.01.2019, which was notified on 18.01.2019 (“impugned order”) , under Article 218(3) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan 1973 (“Constitution”) read with Section 8(c) of the Elections Act ,1 to hold a re-poll in the 20 polling stations of which record had been tampered with. 4.

[12] In view of the order of the Election Commission for holding a re-poll in 20 polling stations, the respondent withdre w his election petition on 25 .01.2019 , while the appellant challenged this order of the Election Commission in the Islamabad High Court through a writ petition filed under Article 199 of the Constitution as well as in this Court through the present appeal filed under Section 9(5) of the Elections Act, by way of abundant caution due t o ambiguity in ascertai ning the appropriate remedy .

[13] The Islamabad High Court dismissed the writ petition of the appellant, vide its order dated 15.02.2019, on the ground that the appellant had availed the alternate statutory remedy of appeal before this Court , and observed that the appellant may re -agitate the matter in writ jurisdiction if his appeal filed in this Court under Section 9(5) of the Elections Act is dismissed on the ground of maintainability .

[14] The appellant filed the petition for leave to appeal against that order of the Islamabad High Court also, in this Court. Both the appeal and the petition for leave to appeal of the appellant are being decided by this judgment. 5. It would be pertinent to mention here that in pursuance of the impugned or der of the Election Commission , the re-poll in 20 polling stations was held on 02.02.2019 and after consolidating the result of this re-poll in 20 polling stations with the result of the first poll in other polling stations, the respondent was notified as a returned candidate on 19.02.2019.

[15] The durability of this superstructure built upon the impugned order is, however, dependent upon the validity of that order . 1 These provisions have not been mentioned in the order dated 14.01.2018 and the notification dated 18 .01.2018. The Election Commission has ref erred to these provisions in its concise statements (CMA No. and CMA No.) filed in the present a ppeal.

[16] CA-, etc 4 6. We have considered the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties, read the case law c ited by them and examined the record of the case. Scope of the powers of the Election Commission under Article 218(3) of the Constitution and Section 8(c) of the Elections Act 7. As the Election Commission and the respondent have mainly referred to the provisions of Article 218(3) of the Constitution and Section 8(c) of the Elections Act, to establish that the Election Commission had the power to make the impugned order, it would be appropriate to reproduce the provisions thereof here for ease of referen ce, before embarking the discussion on the question under consideration with reference to the se provisions : Article 218.

[17] Election Commission. (3) It shall be the duty of the Election Commission to organize and conduct the election and to make such arrang ements as are necessary to ensure that the election is conducted honestly, justly, fairly and in accordance with law, and that corrupt practices are guarded against. Section 8.

[18] Power of Commission to ensure fair election . Save as otherwis e provided, the Commission may — (c) issue such instructions, exercise such powers and make such consequential orders as may in its opinion, be necessary for ensuring that an election is conducted honestly, justly, fairly and in accordance with the provisions of this Act a nd the Rules.

[19] A bare reading of Section 8(c) of the Elections Act shows that it mere ly reiterates the power that is vested in the Election Commission under Article 218(3) of the Constitution by substituting the words “make such arrangements” with the words “issue such instructions, exercise such powers and make such consequential orders ” that are necessary to ensure that the election is conducted honestly, justly, fairly and in accordance with law .

[20] This reiteration of the power of the Election Commission by a sub -constitutional law is of little legal significance, in view of the conferment of that power already by the supreme law of the land – the Constitution. Therefore, we basically need to understand the scope of the constitutional provision. 8.

[21] Article 218(3) of the Constitution entrusts the Election Commission with the duty “to organize and conduct the ele ction”, and empower s it, in general term s, “to make such arrangements as are necessary to ensure that the election is conducted honestly, justly, fai rly and in accordance with law, and that corrupt practices are guarded against” .2 The power so conferred is restricted to the fulfi llment of the 2 Workers' Party v.

[22] Federation PLD 2012 SC 681. Paras 40 & 41 CA-, etc 5 duty specified, that is, “ to organize and conduct the ele ction” .3 Therefore, in order to understand the amplitude of this power, we need to find out the meaning of the term “election” as used in Article 218(3) and to ascertain when the duty of the Election Commission to “c onduct the election”, as entrusted to it under this Article, starts and when it stands completed.

[23] Secondly, it also re quires determination whether the duty of the Election Commission to conduct the election and the power to make the necessary arrangements therefor can be regulated by a law enacted by the Parl iament; if so, what would be the status of the general power of the Election Commission under Article 218(3) of the Constitution vis-à- vis such law. 9.

[24] So far as the first question is concerned , the meaning of the term “election” and of the expression “conduct the election” as used in Articles 218 and 225 of the C onstitution has already been exp ounded by a four -member B ench of this Court in Javaid Hashmi case4. The word s “election” and “conduct the election” , as expounded in that case as well as in the other cases approvingly cited therein, ha ve been used in Article s 218 an d 225 of the Constitution in a wide sense to connote the entire election process consisting of several steps starting with the issuance of the election programme and culminating with the declaration of the returned candidate, which include filing of the nomination papers, scrutiny of the nomination p apers, withdrawal of the candidates, holding the poll, counting of the votes, consolidation of the result and declaration of the returned candidate s, etc.

[25] In this wide sense, the process of conducting the election starts with the issuance of the election programme and stands completed on the publication of the names of the retur ned candidates in the official gazette.5 10. On the second question about regulating the constitutional duty and power of the Ele ction Commission as to conducting the election , by a law enacted by the Parliament , we could not lay our hands on any judgment of this Court that has specifically taken up and dealt with this question.

[26] It , therefore, requires us to make a thorough examinat ion of the operational scheme of the constitutional provisions contained in Part VIII of the Constitution on the subject of “Elections” , as we can correctly understand the meaning and scope of a particular 3 Ibid. 4 Election Commission v. Javaid Hashmi PLD 1989 SC 396. 5 See Sections 5(4), 57 and 98 of the Elections Act.

[27] CA-, etc 6 provision on the subject of “Elections” only when we read this Part of the Constitution as an integrated whole . 11. Part VIII of the Constitution is divided into two Chapters and contains fifteen Articles (213 -226). Chapter I , comprised of Articles 213 to 221, mainly contains th e provisions on the matters of the constitution of the Election Commission, the appointment of the Chief Election Commissioner and four members of the Election Commission, the term of their office, the procedure for their removal from office , the appointment of the officers and s taff of the Commission, and duties of the Election Commission.

[28] While the core matters relating to the subject of “Election” that have been provided for in Chapter II (Articles 222 to 226) are the enactment of electoral laws by the Parliament, the time of general election and bye -election , the appointment of the care -taker Cabinet, and the establishment of special tribunals for resolution of election disputes by law enacted by the P arliament. 12. ‘Broadly speaking, before a n election machinery can be brought into operation, there are three requisites’, as said by Justice Fazal Ali, ‘which require to be attended to, namely, (1) there should be a set of laws and rules making provisions with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections, and it should be decided as to how these laws and rules are to be made; (2) there should be an executive charged with the duty of securing the due conduct of elections; and (3) there should be a judicial tribunal to deal w ith disputes arising out of or in connection with elections.’6 On reading the provisions of Part VIII of the Constitution, we can say that , in general , Article 222 of the Constitution deals with the first of these requisites, Article s 218 and 219 with the second , and Article 225 with the third requisite. 13.

[29] The most relevant provision of Article 222 , in our view, to the question being considered is that of clause (d) thereof , which is reproduced here for ready reference: 222. Electoral laws. Subject to the Constitution, Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) may by law provide for: (a) ……………. (b) ……………. (c) ……………. (d) the conduct of elections and election petitions; the decision of doubts and disputes arising in connection with elections; (e) ……………. (f) ……………. 6 Ponnuswami v.

[30] Returning Officer AIR 1952 SC 64. CA-, etc 7 but no such law shall have the effect of taking away or abridging any of the powers of the Commissioner or the Election Commission under this Part. The reading of clause (d) of Article 222 of the Constitution makes it clear that the Parliament can enact a law that regulates the conduct of elections and such law would consequentially also regulate the constitutional duty and power of the Election Commission to conduct the election .

[31] The confusion as to the scope of the general power of the Election Commission under Article 218(3) is , however , caused by the latter part of Article 222 which says that “no such law shall have the effect of taking away or abridging any of the powers of the Commissioner or the Election Commission under this Part ”.

[32] Although Article 218 , as well as Article 219 of the Constitution which list out the functions of the Election Commission, uses the term “duty” for the Election Commission in rel ation to the conduct of the election , and the word “powers” or “power” has at no other place been expressly used in Part VIII of the Constitution for the Election Commission , we find no difficulty in constru ing that the “powers” referred to in Article 222 are those “duties” and “functions” the performance of which has specifically been entrusted to the Election Commission under this Part of the Constitution .

[33] For, in legal parlance , the words “power”, “duty” and “function” are often used interchangeably, and the use of any one of these words is ordinarily understood to include the others, such as the word “function” is said to include “power” and “duty”7. The latter part of Article 222 , theref ore, operates against the taking away or abridging any of the “duties” and “functions” of the Election Commission that has been entrusted to the Election Commission under Part VIII of the Co nstitution.

[34] The Parliament cannot, by enacting a law , confe r any o f such duties and function s of the Election Commission to any other executive or judicial authority or office ,8 either entirely or partly . This is what, in our view, is meant by the latter part of Article 222 . 14. So far as the general power of the Election Commission under Article 218(3) is concerned, the expression “and in accordance with law” used in that very Article clear ly suggests that it is to be exercised to ensure that the election is conducted in accordance with the law enacted by the Parl iament , and not in suppression thereof.

[35] The Election Commission, thus, cannot exercise its general power in a 7 Nazar Hussain v. State PLD 2010 SC 1021; Gadoon Textile v. WAPDA 1997 SCMR 641 per Fazal Karim J.; A l- Jehad Trust v. Federation PLD 1997 SC 84 per Ajmal Mian J. 8 Province of Sindh v. M.Q.M. PLD 2014 SC 531; E lection Commission v.

[36] Province of Punjab PLD 2 014 SC 668. CA-, etc 8 manner that would make the conduct of election otherwise than in accordance with the law enacted by the Parliament, that is , in violation or breac h of such law. Therefore, a law enacted by the P arliament that regulates the conduct of elections and consequentially the constitutional duty and power of the Election Commission to conduct the election , is not hit by the provisions of the latter part of Article 222 of the Constitution ; as the requirement for the Election Commission to conduct the election “in accordance with law” while performing its constitutional duty has been p rescribed by the Constitution itself, not by a law ena cted by the Parliament . 15.

[37] However, where the law enacted by the Parliament does not cover an unforeseen matter or issue that may arise during the election process , the Election Commission is to exercise its general power under Article 218(3) of the Constitution , in the same manner as all other discretionary powers are exercised , that is, fairly, reasonably and judiciously in accordance with the principles of equity, justice and good conscience .

[38] While exercising its general power in such a situation, the Election C ommission must remember the fundamental principle that the general, plenary and inherent powers are exercised to supplement, not supplant or supersede, the law. Such powers cannot be exercised to defeat the express provisions of law but are invoked only when there is no specific provision of law on the matter or issue that needs to be dealt with.9 16.

[39] Accepting t he contention that the Election Commission has such general and inherent power under Article 218( 3) of the Constitution which is absolute or superior to the law enacted by the Parliament , would be tantamount to going against the constitutional mandate of the rule of law ensured under Article 4 of the Constitution.

[40] Article 4 of the Constitution declares it firmly that t o enjoy the protection of law and to be treated in accordance with law is the i nalienable right of every citizen, wherever he may be, and of every other person for the time being within Pakistan . Given this constitutional mandate, i n the matter of elections , the right of the citizens to vote10 and contest election s11 cannot be entirely left to be dealt with at the discretion of the Election Commission 9 M/s Conforce v.

[41] Syed Ali PLD 1977 SC 599; Roazi Khan v. Nasir 1997 SCMR 1849; Muhammad Sadiq v. Bash iran PLD 2000 SC 820. 10 Province of Sind h v. M.Q.M. PLD 2014 SC 531 - Right to vote was held to be guaranteed by Article 17(2) of the Constitution. 11 Javed Jabba r v. Fedeartion PLD 2003 SC 955 - Right to contest elections was held to be guaranteed by Article 17(2) of the Constitution.

[42] CA-, etc 9 under its general and inherent power by construing such power to be above the law enacted by the Parliament . 17. Article 4 of the Constitution is the bedrock of the rule of law, and an antithesis to the rule of men, in our country. It is a restraint on the executive and judicial organs of the State to abide by the rule of law.12 No person, authority, tribunal or court exercising executive or judicial powers can take any action against an y person in contravention of the law.

[43] T his principle equally applies to this Court in exercising its general and inherent power under Article 187(1) of the Constitution . Under this Article, the Court can issue any direction, order or decree to do complete justice between the parties in any case or matter pending before it , but cannot pass an order in contravention of any of the fundamental rights or any constitutional provision or any relevant statutory law .13 18.

[44] Thus, we can safely conclude on the question of the status of the general power of the Election Commission under Article 218(3) of the Constitution vis-à-vis a law enacted by the Parliament , that this power operates in the area uncovered by such law.14 Alike is the scope and applicability of the powers of the Election Commission under Se ction 8(c) of the Elections Act, which is also evident from the opening words of Section 8, “Save as otherwise provided” .

[45] These words indicate that if something otherwise is provided i n the Elections Act, then this S ection will not apply.15 Further , the amplitude of the power of the Election Commission unde r this Section, like its general power under Article 218(3), is exten ded to the performance of its executive duty to “conduct the election ” and thus it can be exercised only at any stage of the election process,16 not after the completion thereof . 19.

[46] In other words, we can say, the genera l power under Article 218(3) of the Constitution and Section 8(c) of the Elections Act can be exercised by the Election Commission within two parameters: (i) during the election process , which starts with the issuance of the election programme and culminate s with the publication of the name of the 12 Federation v.

[47] Nawaz Sharif PLD 2009 SC 644. 13 Dossani Travels v. Travels Shop PLD 2014 SC 1; Prem Chand v. Excise Commissioner AIR 1963 SC 996. 14 We are fortified in our view by the opinion of Justice Krishna Iyer expressed in Mohinder Singh v. C hief Election Commissioner AIR 1978 SC 851 while constr uing Article 324 (1) of the Indian Constitution, which contains provisions similar, in substance, to that of Article 218(3) of our Constitution as to the entrustme nt of duty of conducting the elections to the Election Commission .

[48] His view was later -on reiterated and followed in A.C. Jose v. Sivan Pillai AIR 1984 SC 921, Kanhiya Lal v. R.K. Trivedi AIR 1986 SC 111 and Special Reference No.1 of 2002 AIR 2003 SC 87. 15 Bartha Ram v. Lala Mehar 1995 SCMR 684. 16 Ibid. CA-, etc 10 returned candidate s in the official gazette , and (ii) when the re is no express provision in the law enacted by the Parliament to deal with the matter or issue that arises during the performance of constitutional duty of conducting the elections honestly, justly, fairly and in accordance with law.17 Applicability of Article 218(3) of the Constitution and Section 8(c) of the Elections Act to the present case 20.

[49] In the present case, the Election Commission passed the impugned order after the consolidation of the final result of the poll by the Returning Officer under Section 95 and the publication of the name of the appellant as a returned candidate in the officia l gazette under Section 9 8 of the Elections Act , when the election process has been completed.

[50] But as the notification of the appellant as a returned candidate had been issued under the interim order of this Court , the same could not have conclude d the election process to create a bar on the exerci se of its general power by the Election Commission under Article 218(3) of the Constitution read with Section 8(c) of the Elections Act.

[51] The objection that the Election Commission exercised its power in the present case after the completion of the election process is, therefore, not sustain able. 21. The second limitation on the exercise of its general power by the Election Commission under Article 218(3) of the Constitution read with Section 8(c) of the El ections Act is, however, found a ttracted .

[52] The matter of directing a re-poll or a fresh poll by the Election Commission in the process of conducting the election has expressly been dealt with in the Elections Act. There are three provisions in the Elections Act that deal with this matter in relation to the duty and power of the Election Commission to “conduct the election” , which are Section s 9, 88 and 121 of the Elections Act .18 As the matter of directing a re-poll by th e Election Commission in the process of conducting the election has expressly been dealt with in the Elections Act, the Election Commission was not justified to invoke and exercise its general power under Article 218(3) read with Section 8(c) of the Electi ons Act in the present matter. 17 See Muhammad Salman v.

[53] Naveed Anjum 202 1 SCMR 1675 (Majority opinion) paras 25 and 42, wherein it was held that in view of the express provisions of Articles 63 and 63A in the Constitution as to the pow er of the Election Commission on the matter of disqualification as well as in view of the leg al framework provided in the Elections Act on this matter, the general or inherent power of the Election Commission under Article 218(3) of the Constitution cannot be exercised on the matter of qualification or disqualification of a returned candidate. 18 We are not concerned with the powers of the Election Tribunal in this regard and have therefore not referred to them here.

[54] CA-, etc 11 22. However, w e are cognizant of the well-settled legal position that t he mentioning of a wrong o r inapplicable provision of law or non - mentioning of the applicable provision of law while exercising a jurisdiction or a power which is otherwise vested in a court, tribunal or authority , does not by itself have fatal consequences.19 Therefore, we proceed to examine whether the impugned order could have been passed by the Election Commission under Section 9 or 88 of the Elect ions Act and can be sustained under any of these provisions of the law .20 Scope of Section 88 of the Elections Act and its a pplicability to the present case 23.

[55] We shall discuss the scope and applicability of Section 9 later. First, we consider the provisions of Section 88, which are reproduced here for ease of reference: 88. Stopping of the poll .—(1) The Presiding Officer shall stop the poll and inform the Returning Officer that he has done so if — (a) the poll at the polling station is, at any time, so interrupted or obstructed for reasons beyond the control of the Presiding Officer that it cannot be resumed during the polling hours fixed under section 70; and (b) any ballot box used at the polling station is unlawfully taken out of the custody of the Presiding Officer, or is accidentally or intentionally destroyed, or is lost or is damaged or tampered with to such an extent that the result of the poll at t he polling station cannot be ascertained . (2) Where a poll has been stopped under sub -section (1), the Returning Officer shall immediately report the circumstances to the Commission and the Commission shall direct a fresh poll at that polling station unless it is satisfied that the result of the election has been determined by the polling that has already taken place at that polling station , along with the result of the polling at other polling stations in the same constituency. (3) ………. (4) ………. (Emphasis added) A reading of Section 88 shows that the tampering with the ballot box referred to therein relates to the polling day, not thereafter.

[56] Secondly, the power of the Election Commission to direct a fresh poll at the relevant polling station is not to be exercised if the Election Commission is satisfied that the result of the election has been determined by the polling that has already taken place at that polling station (before stopping the poll by the Presiding Officer), along with the result of t he polling at other polling stations in the same constituency. 19 Naseer Ahmed v.

[57] Returning Officer 2022 SCP 313 (citation on the official website of this Court); Ola s Khan v. NAB PLD 2018 SC 40; S aadat Khan v. State 2018 SCMR 387; Commissioner of Income Tax v. Abdul Ghani PLD 2007 SC 308. 20 Section 121 of the Elections Act relates to power of the Election Commission as to directing a fresh poll in the conducting of election to the Senate, which is not relevant for present matter.

[58] CA-, etc 12 24. In the present case, as per the report of the Returning Officer as well as the report of the Inquiry Committee constituted by the Election Commission, the ta mpering with the ele ction record had taken place not on the polling day, rather it was made after the consolidation of the final result of the poll by the Returning Officer under Section 95 of the Elections Act .

[59] The impugned order passed by the Election Commission can, therefore , not sustain within the scope of the provisions of Section 88 of the Elections Act. Scope of Section 9 of the Elections Act and its a pplicability to the present case 25. The scope of Section 9 of the Elections Act as well as that of its predecessor provision, that is, Section 103AA of the Representation of People Act 1976, has been a subject of detailed discussion by this Court in several cases.

[60] We would , therefor e, refer to its scope here succinctly. Before doing that, we think, it would be appropriate to cite the relevant part of Section 9 here, for ease of reference: 9. Power of the Commission to declare a poll void .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if, from facts apparent on the face of the re cord and after such enquiry as it may deem necessary, the Commission is satisfied that by reason of grave illegalities or such violations of the provisions of this Act or the Rules as have materially affected the result of the poll at one or more polling s tations or in the whole constituency including implementation of an agreement restraining women from casting their votes, it shall make a declaration accordingly and call upon the voters in the concerned polling station or stations or in the whole constitu ency as the case may be, to recast their votes in the manner provided for bye -elections.

[61] Explanation …………. (2) …………. (3) Notwithstanding the publication of the name of a returned candidate under section 98, the Commission may exercise the powers conferred on it by sub -section (1) before the expiration of sixty days after such publication; and, where the Commission does not finally dispose of a case within the said period, the election of the returned candidate shall be deemed to have become final, subject to the decision of an Election Tribunal on an election petition, if any. (4) While exercising the powers conferred on it by sub -section (1), the Commission shall be deemed to be an Election Tribunal to which an election petition has been presented and sha ll, notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter IX, regulate its own procedure. (5) Any person aggrieved by a declaration of the Commission under this section may, within thirty days of the declaration, prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court.

[62] The opening expression used in Section 9(1), “Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act”, shows that the jurisdiction of the Election Commission under this Section has an overriding effect against any other provision of the Elections Act. Thus, the Election Comm ission is competent to exercise its jurisdiction under this Section, notwithstanding CA-, etc 13 the availability of the remedy of the election petition under Section 139 read with Section 142 and the jurisdiction of the Election Tribunal to grant the same relief under Section 154(1)(b)(i) of the Elections Act.

[63] To the extent of the grounds specified in Section 9(1) upon which the Election Commission can exercise its power to order a re -poll, the jurisdiction of the Election Commission and the Election Tribunal is , therefore, concurrent.21 The Election Commission can exercise its jurisdiction under Section 9(1) of the Elections Act, to order a re -poll if: i.

[64] There have been grave illegalities or violations of the provisions of the Elections Act or the Rules made thereund er; ii. Such illegalities or violations are evident from facts apparent on the face of the record ; and iii. Such illegalities or violations have materially affected the result of the poll at one or more polling stations or in the whole constituency.

[65] Although the ground of grave illegalities or violations of the provisions of the Elections Act or the Rules made thereunder in the election process is common for the exercise of their respective jurisdictions by the Election Commission and the Election Tri bunal, the difference lies in the nature of proof of those illegalities and violations , and in the scope of enquiry. 26.

[66] The words “from facts apparent on the face of the record” used in Section 9(1) are of vital importance in this regard. They restrict the jurisdiction of the Election Commission to such grave illegalities or violations of the Elections Act or the Rules which are evident “from the facts apparent on the face of the record”.

[67] The Elec tion Commission can, therefore , exercise its jurisdiction under Section 9(1) only when the allegation or issue of grave illegalities or violations of the Election s Act does not requ ire a full -fledged trial and recording of pro and contra evidence of the contesting parties ,22 which can only be undertaken by the Election Tribunal.23 27.

[68] We are aware of the power of the Election Commission , under Section 9(1) of the Elections Act, to conduct such enquiry as it may deem necessary for its satisfaction about the alleged grave illegalities or violation s, in addition to the “facts apparent on the face of the record”, but before initiating such inquiry by the Election 21 Aftab Mirani v.

[69] Muhammad Ibrahim PLD 2008 SC 779. 22 Salahuddin Tirmizi v. E lection Commission PLD 2008 SC 735. 23 The similar view of a Full Bench of the Election Commission, comprising of Justices Naimuddin, Riaz Ahmad an d Bashir Jehangiri, expressed in Khurshid Kasuri v. Returning Officer 1994 CLC 296 on the provisions of Section 103AA of the ROPA 1976 (predecessor provisions of Section 9 of the Elections Act) is approved.

[70] CA-, etc 14 Commission the facts a pparent on the face of the record must prima facie indicate the commission of some grave illegality or violation of the Election s Act or the Rules made thereunder, during the election process.24 The Election Commission cannot initiate a roving enquiry to search for some illegalities or violations, on bald and vague allegations unsupported by prima facie proof, in the exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 9(1) of the Elections Act. 28.

[71] Further, the enquiry which the Election Commission can conduc t under this Section can only be of a summary nature, notwithstanding the omission of the word “summary” in Section 9(1),25 as the Election Commission can make an order for re-poll under this Section before the expiration of sixty days after publication of the name of the returned candidate under Section 98 of the Elections Act , not thereafter.

[72] Where the Election Commission does not finally dispose of a case initiated under Section 9(1) within the said period, the proceedings stand abated and the election of the returned candidate is deemed to have become fina l, subject to the decision of the Election Tribunal on the election petition, if any , as per section 9(3) of the Elections Act.

[73] Moreover, as the dismissal of a petition or the abatement of proceedings of a case under Section 9 by the Election Commission does not bar the re - agitation before and trial by the Election Tribunal, of the same grounds of grave illegalities or violations of the Elections Act or the Rules made thereunder ,26 the legislature cannot b e presumed to have intended two full-fledged trials of the same issue before both forums: the Election Commission and the Election Tribunal.

[74] Therefore, we are of the opinion that t he enquiry to be conducted by the Election Commission under Section 9(1) can only be of a summary nature, notwithstanding the omission of t he word “summary” in this Section. 29. The second restriction on the exercise of power under Section 9(1) by the Election Commission is that by reason of the grave illegalities or violation of the provisions of the Elections Act or the Rules , the result of the poll at one or more polling stations or in the whole constituency must have been materially affected.

[75] Any illegality or violation which does not relate to holding and conducting the poll in the election process, and has thus not affected the result of the poll, cannot 24 Ibid. 25 The word “summary” was mentioned in the predecessor provision of Sect ion 9(1), that is Section 103AA of the ROPA 1976. 26 Aftab Mirani v.

[76] Muhammad Ibrahim PLD 2008 SC 779. CA-, etc 15 form the basis for invoking and exercising the power under Section 9(1) by the Election Commission . The grave illegalities or violation s must be such that have materially af fected the result of the poll.27 Although s uch illegalities or violation s may have been committed at any stage of the election process, but not later than the final consolidation of the result of the poll by the Returning Officer under Section 95 of the Ele ctions Act; as any illegality or violation committed after the consolidation of the final result by the Returning Officer cannot be said to have materially aff ected the result of the poll.

[77] I t, therefore, does not fall within the scope of the provisions of Section 9(1) of the Elections Act and cannot be a subject of enquiry by the Election Commission to exercise jurisdiction under this Section. 30. Needless to mention that any fact -finding enquiry or departmental regular enquiry may be got conducted by the Election Commission, in the matter of any illegality or violation committed after the consolidation of the final result to take appropriate administrative or criminal action against the delinquent election official s, but not for an action under Section 9( 1) of the Elections Act. 31.

[78] In the present case, the bar of exercising the powers by the Election Commission before the expiration of sixty days after publication of the name of the appellant as a returned candidate under Section 98 of the Elections Act, was not attracted as the said publication had been made under an interim order of this Court.

[79] However, as the illegality of tampering with the election record had been committed, in the present case, after the consolidation of the final result of the poll by the Returning Officer under Section 95 of the Elections Act, the Elections Commission could not have invoked and exercised its power under Section 9(1) of the Elections Act; for such illegality had not affected the result of the poll already consolidat ed by the Retur ning Officer under Section 95 of the Elections Act .

[80] Further, the fact that who, the appellant or the respondent, was responsible for the tampering made with the election record after the consolidation of the final result of the poll , could not have been decided, nor has it been decided, by the Election Commission within the scope of summary enquiry under Section 9 (1) of the Elections Act.

[81] This fact could only have been decided by the Election Tribunal in a full -fledge d trial. Without deciding that fact, ordering a re - poll in 20 polling stations is tantamount to punishing the appellant 27 See Muhammad Salman v. Naveed Anjum 2021 SC MR 1675 (Majority opinion) para 41. CA-, etc 16 without determining his fault, and awarding the suspected culprit, if he were the respondent.28 In such an uncertain situation , the Election Commission sh ould not have vitiated the official acts of the election officials, which were the counting of votes and the consolidation of the final result of the poll, as they had a presumption of regular performance as per Article 129(e) of the Qanun -e-Shahadat 1984 .

[82] The impugned order is, therefore , not sustainable under Section 9(1) of the Elections Act. Conclusion 32. For all that has been discussed and said above, we conclude that the Election Commission had no power to order a re-poll in the 20 polling station s, under Article 218(3) of the Constitution read with Section 8(c) or Section 9(1) of the Elections Ac t, on the ground of tampering made with the election record after the consolidation of the final result of the poll by the Returning Officer under Section 95 of the Elections Act.

[83] The impugned order of the Election Commission is not sustai nable and is liable to be set aside by this Court in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction under Section 9(5) of the Elections Act. Needless to restate the well -settle d principle that if a court, tribunal or authority not having jurisdiction wrongly assumes and exercises such a jurisdiction and makes an order without jurisdiction, an appeal lies from that order in the same manner as an appeal lies from an order with jurisdiction.29 The appeal of the appellant is , therefore , allowed and the impugned order is set aside.

[84] Consequentially, the superstructure built upon the impugned order also crumbles and falls down . The re -poll held in pursuance of the impugned order and the subsequent notification of the respondent as a returned candidate are quashed. The respondent shall be de -notified, while t he appellant re -notified, as a returned candidate. 33.

[85] The Islamabad High Court rightly dismissed the writ petition of the appellan t, on the ground of the availability of the adequate statutory remedy of appeal before this Court . The petition for leave to appeal of the appellant filed against the order of the Islamabad High Court is merit less and is therefore dismissed; it was mistake nly 28 Behram Khan v.

[86] Abdul Hameed PLD 1990 SC 352; Ejaz Shafi v. Ashraf Shah 1996 SCMR; Jam Madad Ali v. Asghar Ali Junejo 2016 SCMR 251. 29 Muhammad Ashfaq v. State PLD 1973 SC 368; Sabir Shah v. Shad Muhammad PLD 1995 SC 66 per Fazal Karim J.; MEPCO v. Muhamma d Ashiq PLD 2006 SC 328. See also Naseer Ahmed v. Returning Officer 2022 SCP 313 (citation on the official website of this Court) CA-, etc 17 mentioned as allowed in the short order, which shall stand corrected accordingly.