Case No: C.A.212/2011
Case Title: Province of Sindh through Chief Secretary, Govt of Sindh Karachi & another v. Rasheed A. Rizvi & others
Subject: Writ Petition/Quo Warranto
Judge: Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja
Judgment Date: 09-05-2012
Upload Date: 16-05-2012
Citations: PLD 2012 SC 649
SC Citations: 2012 SCP 32
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/C.A.212and213OF2011.pdf

[1] order dated 15.6.2009 passed by t he High Court of Sindh at Karachi, in Const. Petitions Nos.D -  and D - ). Province of Sindh thr. Chief Secretary & another . … Appellant s (In both cases ) VERSUS Rasheed A. Rizvi & others . … Respondent s (In CA  ) Abdul Haleem Siddiqui & others . … Respondent s (In CA  ) (Civil Appeal No.) For the appellant (s): Abdul Fateh Malik, A.G.

[2] Sindh For the respondent -1: Rasheed A. Rizvi, Sr. ASC . For the respondent -2: Anwar Mansoor Khan, Sr. ASC (Civil App eal No.) For the appellant (s): Abdul Fateh Malik, A.G. Sindh For the respondent -1: N.R. For the respondent -2: Mr. Muhammad Waqar Rana. ASC For the respondent -3: Abdul Rasool Memon, Registrar, High Court of Sindh. (in both cases) On Court’s n otice : Maulvi Anwar -ul-Haq, Attorney General of Pakistan (On behalf of Federation) Date of hearing: 16.2.2012 Judgment Jawwad S.

[3] Khawaja, J. - These appeals raise issues concerning the manner in which judicial officers are appointed in the province of Sindh through initial recruitment . The appellants impugn the judgment of a five Member Bench of the High Court of Sindh dated 15.6.2009 that has set aside amendments made by the Sindh Government to th e appointment mechanism For reasons elaborated in th is opinion, we have dismiss ed these appeal s and uph eld the impugned judgment subject to a modification elaborated toward the end of this opinion.

[4] THE PARTIES: 2. Before setting out the facts which have given rise to these two appeals, we may make a note of the parties involved in the controversy . There are two Civil Appeals Nos.212 -213 of 2011 2 appellants, namely the Province of Sindh and the Sindh Public Service Commission (“SPSC”) who have filed both appeals .

[5] Rashid A. Rizvi , a member of the Sindh High Court Bar Association ( “SHCBA ”) and the SHCBA are respectively respondents Nos. 1 and 2 in Civil Appeal No. while Abdul Haleem Siddiqui Advocate who was a member of the Sindh Bar Council ( “SBC”) and the SBC are respectively respondents Nos. 1 and 2 in Civil Appeal No..

[6] THE FACTS : 3. The appointment of judicial officer s in the District Judiciary in the province of Sindh is governed by the Sin dh Judicial Service Rules, 1994 (the “1994 Rules”). Prior to the framing of these rules in 1994, judicial office rs were inducted in the Sindh j udicial service in accordance with rules of general application which were framed under section 26 of the Sindh Civil Servants Act, 1973.

[7] These were called the Sindh Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules 1974 (the “1974 Rules ”) and were applicable to the recruitment of civil servants including those inducted in the judicial service. 4. This position was changed radically by the 1994 Rules which were notified on 24.11.1994 vide notification No.

[8] SOR -I(S&GAD) -93. The backgro und and the reasons which led to the framing of the 1994 Rules ha ve an important bearing on the outcome of this case . We will advert to these in detail, later in the opinion. For the present, it will suffice to note that the method of recruitment prescribe d by the 1994 Rules departed from the earlier 1974 Rules in important particulars; the most relevant in the present context being the method of selection and appointment of Judges in the District Judiciary.

[9] While recruitments to the judicial service prior to 1994 were made by the Government of Sindh on the recommendation of the S PSC, Rule 5 of the 1994 Rules stipulated that appointments to the judicial s ervice would thenceforth be made on the recommendation of the Provincial Selection Board. The Provincial Selection Board was defined in Rule 2(e) to mean “the Administrative Committee of the High Court or a Committee of not less than three High Court Judges specially constituted for the purposes of these rules by the Full Court” .

[10] The Rules also provided for o ther matters including promotions, seniority, transfer and discipline. Civil Appeals Nos.212 -213 of 2011 3 However, the present controversy before us is confined to the method of appointment of judicial officers. 5. The Government of Sindh, v ide Notification No. SOR -I(5GA&CD)2 -, dated 4. 12.2008 (the “impugned Notification”) , again gave the SPSC a significant and over -bearing role in the recr uitment of Judges in the Sindh j udicial service.

[11] This has been done by stipulating in Rule 5 that recruitments to the posts of Civil Judges and Judici al Magistrates shall be made by initial appointment through the S PSC on the requisition of the High Court of Sindh. 6. The respondents were aggrieved of the amendments made in the Sindh Judicial Service Rules, 1994, through the impugned Notification.

[12] The y, therefore, challenged the con stitutional validity of the said Notification before the High Court. It was their case that these amendments were violative of the constitutional imperative requiring separation of the Judiciary from the Executive and thus adversely affected the independence of the Judiciary.

[13] The respondents, therefore, prayed that the impugned N otification be struck down on the ground that the same was ultra vires the Constitution and in particular, was inconsistent with Articles 4, 9, 14, 1 75 and 203 of the Constitution. For ease of reference, we can state here the relevant parts of the latter two articles.

[14] Article 175(3) of the Constitution commands that “[t]he Judiciary shall be separated progressi vely from the Executive within fourteen years from the commencing day ,” and Article 203 states that “ each High Court shall supervise and control all courts subordinate to it. ” 7. According to the respondents, the conferment of th e power of selection on the S PSC and the power of appointment on the Government , coupled with the withdrawal of power from the Provincial Selection Board amounted to an unconstitutional encroachment on the independence of the judiciary.

[15] The case of the Province, however, was that the amendments d id not adversely affect the independence of the Judiciary or its separation from the Executive. The appellants and the respond ents, both reaffirm before us, their respective positions taken in the Sindh High Court . Civil Appeals Nos.212 -213 of 2011 4 THE ISSUES: 8.

[16] The controversy between the parties is thus greatly narrowed down in view of the above . If indeed the amendments in the 1994 Rules and the consequent elimination of th e High Court from the process of selecting and appointing judicial officers amounts to negation of the separation of the Judiciary from the E xecutive or if it constitutes an encroachment on the independence of the judiciary , then the impugned Notification would have to be struck down and the judgment of the Sindh High Court will be affirmed.

[17] In other words, the question before us is quite strai ghtforward : has the impugned Notification contravened t he constitut ional provisions requiring the independence of the judiciary and its separation from the executive ? A consideration of established precedent, as well as the historical perspective in which the original 1994 Rules were framed, brings us to answer this question in the affirmative.

[18] We shall presently explain both these grounds on the basis of which, the appeals have been dismissed. (a) The Link between Inde pendence of the Judiciary and the P rocess of Appointment of Judges : 9. Our const itutional courts have consistently held that the process of appointments to the judiciary must be carefully scrutinized through the lens of constitutional principles such as the principle of separation of powe rs.

[19] In the Al - Jehad Trust case, this Court stated with reference to appointment of judges of the superior judiciary ". ..that the independence of the judiciary is inextricably linked and connected with the process of appointment of judges and the security o f their tenure and other terms and conditions ." (PLD 1996 SC 324, 429) Although this was said in the context of appointment to the High Court, the principle applies with equal force to all judicial appointments, including those in the District Judiciary.

[20] A ccordingly, the dictum laid down in the Al-Jehad case was soon reaffirmed by this Court in the case of Mehram Ali & Others v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1998 SC 1445, 1474) and Sh. Liaquat Hussain v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1999 SC 504, 658), both ca ses which concerned the District judiciary.

[21] The aforesaid dictum has also been recently reiterated in Sindh High Court Bar Association v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2010 SC 879, 1182) and Munir Hussain Bhatti v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2011 SC 407). In Civil Appeals Nos.212 -213 of 2011 5 the latter case, the Court, after examining the case law, concluded that “it is an undisputed tenet of our Constitutional scheme that in matters of appointment, security of tenure and removal of Judges the independence of the Judiciary should remain fu lly secured .” (PLD 2011 SC 407, 467) 10.

[22] The aforesaid principle would in itself be enough to bring us to the conclusion that the impugned Notification, which takes away the power of selection from the High Court and gives it to the SPSC does not meet Con stitutional standards which have, by now become part of our jurisprudence. The method of making appointments of judicial officers attempted through the impugned Notification has the effect of negating the independence of the judiciary and the separation of powers envisaged in Articles 175 and 203 of the Constitution because the High Court is neither involved in the selection of Judges nor in their appointment.

[23] The former function is meant to be performed by the SPSC and the latter by the Sindh Government . (b) Reading the 1994 Rules in their Historical Backdrop. 11. The h istorical context in which the 1994 Rules were framed makes the point clearer. It should be recalled that the 1994 Rules were framed in the wake and as a result of judgments by the Sindh Hig h Court and the Supreme Court .

[24] Consistent with established precedent the role constitutionally envisaged for the High Courts in the judicial appointments process c annot lawfully be substituted by the SPS C because that would go against the concept of an ind ependent judiciary separate, in a real sense, from the Executive . Particularly important are the two Sharaf Faridi cases: Sharaf Faridi v.

[25] Federation of Islamic Republic of Pakistan (PLD 1989 Karachi 404) and the appeal against the aforesaid decision repor ted as Government of Sindh v. Sharaf Faridi (PLD 1994 SC 105). In these cases, firstly the High Court and then the Supreme Court defined the implications of the constitutional provisions dealing with independence of the Judiciary and its separation from th e Executive.

[26] The relevant extracts from these cases have been reproduced in the impugned judgment. Some may usefully be re iterated at this point. In the cited case the High Court held that “ the supervision and control over the judiciary vested in the High Court Civil Appeals Nos.212 -213 of 2011 6 under Article 203 of the Constitution, keeping in view Article 175, is exclusive in nature ,…any … notification empowering any executive functionary to have … control over the subordinate judiciary will be violative of above Article 203 of the Constit ution.

[27] Besides it will militate against the concept of separation of powers and independence of judiciary…” In appeal , the Supreme Court re-affirmed the constitutional imperative by observing that “separation of the Executive from the Judiciary was an obli gation cast . . . by the Constitution and this obligation could not be willed away or avoided.

[28] It had, willy nilly to be carried into effect despite all the difficulties.” The context of the case was the separation of the executive magistracy (and its cont rol by the Executive ), from the judicial functio n, but the lines of such separation were clearly delineated. These pronouncements w ere unambiguous and provide the norms to be adhered to in the appointment process for the District Judiciary. 12.

[29] The Court gave a well defined meaning and outlined the scope of the separation of powers and judicial independence mentioned in our Constitution . It is in the backdrop of the judicial pronouncements referred to above , and the interpretation of the Constitution made therein , that the 1994 Rules for the recruitment of judicial officers were framed .

[30] The 1994 Rules must therefore be analysed in the same context. As has been noted earlier , the original 1974 Rules of general application were applicable to the recruitment o f judicial officers also. The judgments of the Sindh High Court and of this Court in the case of Sharaf Faridi were the direct cause for making changes in the 1974 Rules and for framing the 1994 Rules.

[31] This is evident from the judgment of this Court in 199 4 wherein steps taken by the Government of Sindh have been noted and it has also been observed that “Rules for appointment and transfer etc. of judicial officers have been drafted and are likely to be approved by the High Court soon.” It was in fact, durin g the pendency of the case before this Court that the Provinces including Sindh initiated the process of separating the Judiciary from the Executive.

[32] The Sindh Government also modified the 1974 Rules and in addition, framed the 1994 Rules which include Rul es 4 and 5 relating to the selection and appointment of Judges in the District Judiciary . The Rules adverted to by this Court in Sharaf Faridi’s case are in fact, the 1994 Rules as is Civil Appeals Nos.212 -213 of 2011 7 evident from the correspondence on record between the Sindh Government and the High Court in 1993 -94.

[33] In any event, the fact that the 1994 Rules emerged in the background of the two Sharaf Faridi cases is uncontested before us . Even the Province of Sindh , acknowledges it . The learned Advocate General has specifically stated i n his written submissions that “…the required notification[s] were issued in terms of the judgment passed by the Larger Bench of the Honourable High Court of Sindh” in the case of Sharaf Faridi (para 4 (f), Synopsis on behalf of the Province of Sindh) . 13.

[34] The changes made by the 1994 Rules to the process of appointment of judges are, therefore, to be considered a contemporaneous statutory exposition of Articles 175 and 203 of the Constitution and the interpretation given to these in the Sharaf Faridi cases. Being contemporaneous, this exposition enjoys a great deal of sanctity and cannot lightly be set aside in favour of a materially different expression .

[35] The value attached to such contemporaneous exposition is well -settled in our jurisprudence. An accep ted authority on the interpretation of statutes notes this in no uncertain terms : “... the best exposition of a statute or any other document is that which it has received from contemporary authority.

[36] Where this has been given by enactment or judicial dec ision, it is of course to be accepted as conclusive .” (Maxwell on the Interpretation of Statutes, 11th Ed. (Sweet and Maxwell Limited: 1962), p. 29 6, Chapter 11). In Hakim Khan’s case, this Court inferred such a relationship between the Preamble encapsula ting the Objectives Resolution and the 1973 Constitution, the latter being a contemporaneous exposition of the former.

[37] The Court stated: “ …after the adoption of the Objectives Resolution on 12th March, 1949, the Constitution -makers were expected to draft s uch provisions for the Constitution which were to conform to its directives and the ideals enunciated by them in the Objectives Resolution and in the case of any deviation from these directives … the Constituent Assembly… [itself] would [have] take[n] the necessary remedial steps … to ensure compliance with the principles laid down in the Objectives Resolution .“ Hakim Khan and Others Vs.

[38] Govt. of Pakistan and others (PLD 1992 Supreme Court 595 , 619 ). In the present case, we are brought to the conclusion that the structural features of th e 1994 Rules were a contemporaneous exposition of judicial pronouncements about Articles 175 and 203 in the Sharaf Faridi cases. Civil Appeals Nos.212 -213 of 2011 8 14.

[39] These feature s highlighting the change brought about by the 1994 Rules may now be closely examined to get a bette r idea of the meaning of Article s 175 and 203 . As has been noted above, prior to the 1994 Rules, judicial officers in Sindh were appointed by the Provincial Government on recommendations made by the Sindh Public Service Commission.

[40] T he High Court had no say in the process. It is as an undisputed consequence of the Sharaf Faridi cases that changes were brought about in the proces s of appointments to the Sindh j udicial service. The fundamental change that the 1994 Rules brought about, was that the High Court of Sindh was made a key institution having a crucial role in the appointment of judges.

[41] The 1994 Rules, in draft form, were before the Supreme Court and were noted with satisfaction as is clear from the report of the case (at p.113). The 1994 Rules , it may be seen, made express stipulation that the Provincial Selection Board which was comprised of Judges of the High Court of Sindh would select the judicial officers for appointment to the judicial service and the G overnment would make their formal appointments in accordance with Rule 4 of the 1994 Rules.

[42] No appointments to the Sindh judicial service were, therefore, possible under the 1994 Rules unless recommended by the Provincial Selection Board comprising exclusively of Judges of the Sindh High Court. This background which was part of the defining precedent in the case of Sharaf Faridi has been elaborately referred to and commented upon in the impugned judgment. 15.

[43] The foregoing discussion makes it clear that the dispensation envisa ged in the 1974 Rules did not meet the constitutional benchmark for the independence of the Judiciary and its separation from the Executive. This standard was satisfied only by the above -mentioned structural change, brought about through the 1994 Rules.

[44] It only follows from this that anything which reverses this fundamental change by making judicial appointments the exclusive preserve of the Sindh Government and the SPSC, would amount to a violation of the constitutional imperative. The impugned Notificatio n dated 4.12.2008 is unconstitutional for precisely this reason.

[45] It reverts the process of appoin ting judicial officers in Sindh (in essential particulars ), to the situation which was prevalent prior to 1994. In this Civil Appeals Nos.212 -213 of 2011 9 dispensation, the government make s appo intments while the selection is done through the SPS C. The High Court has been left with no role in the selection and appointment o f Judges in the Sindh judicial s ervice.

[46] The High Court can, at most, trigger the process of appointment by making a requisiti on, but the Court itself has no say either in the selection of judicial officers for recruitment in the judicial service or in their appointment. We have no hesitation in following precedent and in adhering to the constitutional principles enunciated there in.

[47] As a consequence, we hold that the impugned Notification dated 4.12.2008 and the amendments made thereby in the 1994 Rules, are ultra vires the Constitution and of no legal effect. The said Notification and the amendments thereby made have rightly been struck down on this ground by the High Court of Sindh . 16.

[48] This does not imply that every province is obliged to adopt a uniform method for the selection and appointment of judicial officers. It is a hallmark of our federal Constitution that each federat ing unit is free to carve out its own policy and practice in such matters. ‘Parity’ between the federating units as urged by the learned Advocate General, Sindh is not required and would be contrary to the federal nature of our Constitution .

[49] The only requi rement is that the policy and practice adopted by each Province must conform to constitutional imperatives elaborated in Articles 175 and 203 and the relevant precedents - which demand, inter alia , that the High Courts must retain a significant degree of ' control' over the appointment and selection process of judicial officers.

[50] EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY : TRICHOTOMY: 17. With great respect for the learning and erudition of the learned five member Bench of the High Court, we do wish to differ with certain observa tions and findings relating to the “past performance” of the SPSC given by the learned Bench . In para 35 of the impugned judgment, the Court has cited certain comments filed by the Government of Sindh and a report prepared by Mr.

[51] Justi ce Faisal Arab, to conclude that these “speak[] volumes about the mismanagement and mal -practices prevalent in the said Commission. ” The High Court has also stated its opinion that “… experience show [that the SPSC] has remained under the influence of the Executive and on Civil Appeals Nos.212 -213 of 2011 10 several occasions successfully given results as per their expectations or to say the least, on considerations other than merits ” (para 66 ).

[52] At the e nd of the judgment, the High Court felt it necessary to go beyond the plea of the petitioner’s counsel and reco rd its finding that the impugned Notification was not just mala fide in law, but also mala fide in fact (para . 87) . With due respect to the learned Judges , these observations and conclusions raise some fundamental constitutional questions, inter alia, as t o the scope of judicial review of administrative action and the constitutionally mandated trichotomy of state functions.

[53] That the SPSC is an executive body is quite enough to show that it cannot , under our constitutional scheme, be vested with the exclusiv e power to select judicial officers. Moreso, when the Gover nment (as per Rule 4) is obliged to appoint the persons so selected . The observations of the High Court adverted to above, however, go beyond this principle and can be seen as blurring the separati on of powers.

[54] JUDICIAL REVIEW: 18. In the exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 199 of the Constitution, the High Court was called upon only to judge the legal and constitutional validity of the impugned Notification . Passing judgment on the competen ce or good faith of the SPSC or over the SPSC’s performance as an institution, past or present we say with respect, was not called for in this case .

[55] By passin g these remarks, the Court has risked taint ing the institutional credibility of SPSC on the basis of specific or unspecified incidents adverted to by the High Court, which would be amenable to correction through judicial review. Such taint in turn, create s far-reaching repercussions effecting well settled constitutional principles .

[56] When a forum no les s lofty than a five member Bench of the High Court puts it in writing that the Commission is blighted by “ mismanagement and mal -practices ” and makes appointments on “ considerations other than merits ,” then it is only natural that innumerable professionals who are regularly examined by the SPSC, be they teachers, doctors, accountants, revenue officers etc, would flock to the courts seeking to get the decisions of SPSC overturned based on the authority of a full Bench of the High Court.

[57] Such a situation would be both inconsistent with Civil Appeals Nos.212 -213 of 2011 11 precedent and constitutionally questionable, given the doctrine of separation of powers which requires that the three organs of the State are considered coordinate and co -equal. 19. The SPSC , it should be noted is a n executive authority and a singularly important institution.

[58] It was c reated by the Sindh Public Service Com mission Act, 1989 (XI of 1989), an act passed in exercise of powers specifically conferred by the Constitution. The institutional importance of a Public Service Commission becomes clear er when we notice that such Commissions have been specifically mentioned in all of Pakistan ’s Constitutions.

[59] Article 242 of the 1973 Constitution stipulates that the …Provincial Assembly of a Province in relation to affairs of a Pr ovince, may, by law, provide for the establishment and constitution of a Public Service Commission… (2) A Public Service Commission shall perform such functions as may be prescribed by law .” 20.

[60] The SPSC, to which certain functions of the Provincial Gover nment of Sindh have by law been delegated under Article 138 of the Constitution, has correctly been deemed by the High Court as an executive authority . It is clearly performing an executive function and for this very reason, it cannot be given the task of making appointments to the Judicature.

[61] It may , however, be noted that while it remains a part of the Executive branch , for the effective discharge of its duties, it has been provided a certain degr ee of autonomy from the political executive. Where such autonomy is unlawfully impinged upon by the Executive in a given situation, the remedy lies in rectifying the specific situation under Article 199 of the Constitution, rather than declaring an Executive body to be incompetent or to be acting mala fide . 21.

[62] The SPSC a s specifically envisaged in the Constitution and the SPSC Act has the backing and mandate of Article 242 of the Constitution. The High Court undoubtedly has the power to exercise judicial review over specific selections/recommendations made by SPSC . Such review, however, will have to be situation specific and secondly, will need to meet the well settled criteria justifying such review.

[63] An illegal decision taken by the SPSC while selecting District Attorneys or Prosecutors for the Sindh Government can thus easily be set -aside by the High Court in exercise of powers of judicial review vested in it under Article Civil Appeals Nos.212 -213 of 2011 12 199 of the Constitution. A specific selection or set of selections can also be reviewed judicially on the ground of malice in fact , if there is sufficient material to establish such malice.

[64] However, in view of the constitutional principle of trichotomy of powers, a High Court would not be in a position to negate the powers of an executive body such as SPSC which, as noted above, has the backing o f an enactment passed by the provincial legislature in accordance with Article 242 of the Constitution.

[65] We, therefore, are of the opinion, that the general observations, comments and conclusions drawn in respect of SPSC by the High Court were not appropria te or necessary in the facts and circumstances of th e present appeals. We have felt the necessity of reiterating the constitutional structure of separation of powers between the Executive, the Judiciary and the Legislature to ensure that the selections/rec ommendations, past and future, mad e by the SPSC are not subjected to litigation and judicial review on the basis of the observations and conclusions made by a five member Bench of the Sindh High Court.

[66] This does not, in any manner, restrict the case -specif ic power of judicial review vested in the High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution and to examine the actions of the SPSC . 22. For the foregoing reasons , while these appeals have been dismissed for the reasons noted above, certain remarks an d observations made by the High Court in respect of the SPSC have not been affirmed .