Case No: C.A.458/2017
Case Title: M/s. Pakistan WAPDA Foundation, Lahore v. The Collector of Customs, Sales Tax, Lahore, etc
Subject: Tax/Excise Duty
Judge: Mr. Justice Yahya Afridi
Judgment Date: 08-12-2022
Upload Date: 08-12-2022
Citations: 2023 SCMR 79
SC Citations: 2022 SCP 336
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.a._458_2017.pdf

[1] judgment dated 04.10.2016 passed by the Lahore High Cou rt, Lahore in Excise Tax Reference No. 02 of 2009). M/s Pakistan WAPDA Foundation … Appellant Versus The Collector of Customs, Sales Tax, Lahore, etc. … Respondent s For the Appellant: Mian Ashiq Hussain, ASC (through video -link, Lahore) For the Respondent s: Mrs.

[2] Kausar Parveen, ASC Mr. Naeem Hassan, Secy. Litigation, FBR Date of Hearing: 19.10.2022 JUDGMENT Yahya Afridi, J. - M/s Pakistan WAPDA Foundation (‘appellant ’) challenged the judgment of the Lahore High Court, dated 04.10.2 016, rendered in Excise Tax Reference No. 02 of 2009 , whereby three concurrent orders passed by the adjudicatory forum s provided under the Central Excise s Act, 1944 (‘Central Excise s Act’) and the Sales Tax Act, 1990 (‘Sale s Tax Act’) had been maintained, and this Court vide its order dated 24.03.2017 granted the leave to appeal in the following terms: Leave is granted to consider whether reclamation of transformer oil by the petitioner is tantamount to manufacturing within the purview of the Central Excise Act, 1994; and whether the said process is a taxable supply chargeable to sales tax under the provisions of Section 3 of the Sales Tax Act, 1990.

[3] Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 2 Show Cause Notice 2. Briefly, the facts of the case are that the appellant was served with a show cause noti ce dated 18. 06.2003 (‘Show Cause Notice’) by the Deputy Director Sales Tax , asserting that the appellant was reprocessing waste transformer oil into useable transformer oil in the Transformer Oil Reclamation Plant (‘Plant’) installed at its premises at Sha limar Town , Lahore, and that too, without obtaining a central excise license and sales tax registration and without paying the central excise duty and the sales tax leviable thereon , and thereby violat ed the provisions of rules 7, 9, 52, 174, 176, 226, 236 and 238 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 read with section s 2(25) and 3 of the Central Exci ses Act.

[4] Further, the appellant was stated to have also violat ed the provisions of SRO 456(I)/96 dated 13.06.1996 superseded by SRO 333(I)2002 dated 15.06.2002, ap plicable under section s 2(16) and (33), 3, 6, 14, 15, 22, 23 and 26 of the Sales Tax Act . Written Response of the Appellant 3. In its written respon se to the Show Cause Notice, the appellant responded , inter alia , that it was a society registered under th e Societies Registration Act , 1860 , established only for charitable purposes , and carried out no commercial activit y; that the activity of reclamation of transformer oil by the appellant was exempt from the levy of central excise duty ; that the appellant only provid ed service of repair ing the transformers to WAPDA , which did not constitute ‘supply ’ of any taxable goods or ‘manufacture ’ of any new marketable items , and hence was not liable to levy of excise duty and sales tax .

[5] Decisions of Adjudicatory F orums 4. All three adjudicatory forums vide the Order -in-Original dated 27.04.2005 , the Order-in-Appeal dated 29.03.2006 , and the Order of the Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 3 Appellate Tribunal dated 21.10.2008 , concurrently rejected the stance taken by the appellant , and held the appella nt liable to payment of excise duty and sales tax for reclamation of transformer oil.

[6] These findings were maintained by the High Court in its impugned judgment. Submissions of the P arties 5. The learned counsel for the appellant in his oral submissions , as well as in the concis e statement , reiterated the stance the appellant had taken in its written response to the Show Cause Notice .

[7] In addition , he submitted that the Central Excise s Act and the Sales Tax Act were the creation of the Parliament , and the Pa rliament lacked the authority to legislate on the subject of ‘services ’, that being the constitutional domain of the Provinces , and not of the Federation , within the contemplation of Article 142 of the Constitution.

[8] T he learned counsel further contended that during the entire process of reclamation, transformer oil remained the property of WAPDA , and there fore, no sale of transformer oil took place, which was sine qua non in Entry No. 49 of the Federal Legislative List, hence the levy of sales tax could not be imposed on the activity of reclamation of transformer oil carried out by the appellant.

[9] To support his stance, he placed reliance on the cases of Chairman FBR v . Hazrat Hussain1, Province of Madras v. M/s Boddu Paidanna2, State of Madras v . Gannon Dunk erley3 and Haider Zaidi v . Abdul Hafeez4. 6. In rebuttal , the learned counsel representing the Revenue vehemently opposed the contention s of the learned counsel for the appellant and maintained that the activity of the appellant of reclaim ing transformer oil came within the charging provisions of the Central 1 2018 SCMR 939. 2 AIR 1942 FC 33. 3 AIR 1958 SC 560. 4 1991 SCMR 1699.

[10] Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 4 Excise s Act and the Sales Tax Act. He submitted that the appellant - Foundation was an ‘Associated Undertaking ’ of WAPDA , therefore, the activity of reclaim ing transformer oil by the appellant for WAPDA fell within the purview of sub -clause (ii) of clause (a) of sub -section (2) of section 46 of the Sales Tax Act.

[11] He explained that in case the supplier and the recipient are ‘associated persons ’ and the supply is made for no consideration or for a consider ation which is lower than the open market price, the value of supply shall mean the open market price of the supply excluding the amount of tax. Therefore, he submitted, the applicable rate of refine d transformer oil in the open market was taken for the calculation of the s ales tax in the present case.

[12] With regard to the levy of the excise d uty, he contended that the activity of reclaim ing transformer oil came within the purview of ‘manufacture ’ and ‘production’ in terms of section s 2(25) and 3 of the Centr al Excise s Act read with SRO No. 456(I)(96) dated 13.06.1996. Admitted Factual P osition 7.

[13] Before we proceed onto consider ing the contentions of the learned counsel for the parties , it would be important to first lay out the essential admitted facts. First, the period of the alleged non -payment of the excise duty and sales tax is 07.05.2002 t o 18.06.200 3 (‘relevant period’) ; second, the appellan t is a separate legal juristic entity , and legally distinct from WAPDA ; third, these two separate legal persons e ntered into an arrangement , where in the appellant was to reclaim transformer oil of WAPDA at its Plant and receive consideration for the said activity ; and finally, the title of transformer oil during the entire process of reclamation remained with WAPDA, while the possession (and not ownership) of the transformer oil was delivered by WAPDA to the Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 5 appellant to clear it of impurities and make it useable again , after which the same was returned to WAPDA . 8.

[14] Insofar as the contention of Revenue that the appel lant is an associated person is concerned, we note that the same was not asserted in the Show Cause Notice. Therefore, it would not be appropriate to entertain this argument at this stage. Constitutional Challenge 9. Given the above admitted facts, we f irst a ddress the constitutional challenge made by the appellant to the very vires of any dut ies or taxes on ‘services’ under the Central Excise s Act and the Sales Tax Act .

[15] We find th is challenge to be both misplaced and misdirected . The legislati ve authori ty of the Parliament has been clearly laid down in the 4th Schedule to the Constitution , and where the Parliament transgresses the said authority and enacts a law encroach ing upon a legislative field not provided for in the Federal List, or the erstwhile C oncurrent List,5 the law so enacted would be without lawful authority in view of the clear mandate of Article 142 of the Constitution.

[16] However, the facts of the present case are otherwise. Throughout the relevant period , the Parliament had the authority to legislate , as provided in Entry No. 44 and Entry No. 49 of the Federal Legislati ve List in the 4th Schedule to the Constitution , on the subjects of excise duty and sales tax. The said Entries , as they then stood , read as under: Entry No. 44 : Duties of ex cise, including duties on salt, but not including duties on alcoholic liquors, opium and other narcotics.

[17] Entry No. 49: Taxes on the sales and purchases of goods imported, exported, produced, manufactured or consumed. The Parliament in order to bolster p rovincial autonomy introduced amendments in the Constitution through the 18th Amendment in 2010 , 5 18th Constitutional Amendment in 2010. Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 6 which included an amendment in Item No. 49 of the Federal Legislati ve List and the amendment item read as under: Entry No. 49: Taxes on the sales and purchase s of goods imported, exported, produced, manufactured or consumed except sales tax on services . (Emphasis provided) Thus, as there was no bar on the c onstitutional mandate of the Parliament to legislate on the subjects of excise duty and sales tax during the relevant period, there was no restriction on the legislative authority of the Parliament to legislate on ‘services’, which was introduced in Entry No. 49 through the 18th Constitutional Amendment in the year 2010.

[18] Surely, the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant would have substance , had the relevant period been after the introduction of the 18th Amendment , which is not the case in hand. Accordingly, the constitutional challenge made by the learned counsel for the appellant is dispelled. Essential Question of Law 10.

[19] On merits, the main thrust of the learned counsel for the appellant was that the appellant was providing a service to WAPDA under an agreement , and not carrying o ut any manufacturing activity, so as to come within the purview of the charging sections of the Central Excise s Act and the Sales Tax Act.

[20] Thus, the essential question that require s determination can be stated as under : Whether in the facts and circumstances of the present case, reclamation of used transformer oil carried out by the appellant for WAPDA amount ed to ‘manufacture’ within the contemplation of the Central Excise s Act and the Sales Tax Act ? In this regard, we have noticed that all three statutory adjudicatory forum s failed to appreciate the distinct exposure of the appellant under the two statutes - the Central Excise s Act and the Sales Tax Act.

[21] They also failed to grasp the scheme expounded by each of the statute s, and appreciate that these statutes relate d to different taxing events , and thus Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 7 exposed persons to liability in distinct scenarios . In order to ensure that no such overlapping occurs , we shall consider and address the contested claims of the parties relating to each statute , separately.

[22] Central Excise Duty 11. Central excise duty is an in -direct tax, the incidence whereof is to be passed on to the consumer. During the relevant period , the govern ing law was the Central Excise s Act, which had four essential facets: first, the subject matter; second, the taxing event; third , the person who wo uld be liable to pay the tax ; and fourth, the rate of the tax .

[23] The subject matter is the specified ‘excisable goods’ and ‘excisable services’ , as provided in the First Schedule thereto ; the ‘taxing event ’ is when the ‘excisable goods’ are produced or manuf actured , or when the ‘excisable services’ are provided or rendered ; the person liable to pay the tax is who produce s or manufacture s the ‘excisable goods’ , or the one who provide s or render s the ‘excisable services’ ; and the extent of liability, that is the rate of excise duty , is specified in the First Schedule to the Central Excise s Act.

[24] It is only when the first two essential conditions are fulfilled that the excise duty at the rate specified under the Central Excise s Act would be chargeable to the perso n who manufactured the ‘excisable goods’ , or the person who provided the ‘ excisable services’ . 12. In the present case, during the relevant period , the Central Excise s Act read with the Central Excise Rules, 1944 w as the applicable law .

[25] The charging -section was section 3 of the Central Excise s Act, and the relevant p ortion thereof during the relevant period read as under: 3. Duties specified in the First Schedule to be levied (1) There shall be levied and collected in such manner as may be prescribed duties of excise on all excisable goods, produced or manufactured in Pakistan or imported into Pakistan and on such goods, as the Federal Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify, as are produced or manufactured in the non -tariff areas and a re brought to the tariff areas, and on all excisable Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 8 services, provided or rendered, in Pakistan, as, and at the rates, set forth in the First Schedule ............................................. . . . .

[26] Provided further that notwithstanding anything con tained in this Act, in respect of excisable goods and services which the Federal Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify, the duty shall be levied and collected as if it were a tax payable under section 3 of the Sales Tax Act, 1990 , and all the provisions of that Act and the rules, notifications, orders and instructions made or issued thereunder shall, as far as may be and with necessary modifications, apply . (Emphasis provided) While t he relevant provision relating to the mode, manner and payer of the excise duty was prescribed under rule 7 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 .

[27] The said rule then read as under: 7. Recovery of Duty. --Every person who produces , cures, purchases or otherwise acquires without payment of duty, or manufac tures any excisable goods , or who stores such goods in a warehouse, shall pay the duty or duties due on such goods, at such time and place and to such persons as may be designated in or under the authority of these Rules , whether the payment of such duties is secured by bond or otherwise; provided that, in the case of unmanufactured products, the person purchasing or acquiring them from a curer shall assume the liability for the payment of duty; and if any such person does not pay such duty or duties at suc h time and place and to such person as aforesaid, or upon written demand made by the proper officer, whether such demand is delivered personally or is left at his dwelling house, or at the premises where such duty or duties have been charged, every such pe rson shall be liable to a penalty under these Rules: Provided that, in the case of natural gas, the liability for payment of duty shall, if the Central Board of Revenue by order in writing so directs, be of the distributors or the consumers. (Emphasis pr ovided) Excisable Goods 13.

[28] As for the first element, we note that ‘transformer oil ’ was at the relevant period an ‘excisable good ’ within the purview of the Central Excise s Act, as it was enumerated as PCT heading 2710.1997 which in view of Article 1(i ) of the First Schedule to the Central Excises Act formed part of that Schedule.

[29] Manufacture of Excisable Goods 14. Moving on to the next crucial determining element, the taxing event - whether reclamation of the said ‘excisable good ’ amounted to manufactu re. This would require a recourse to the definition of the term Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 9 ‘manufacture ’, as provided under the Central Excise s Act, the relevant portion therein then read as under: Section 2 (25) ‘manufacture’ includes any process incidental or ancillary to the completion of a manufactured product and any process of re- manufacture, remaking, reconditioning or repair and the process of packing or repacking such product; and, in relation to tobacco, includes the preparation of cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, biris, cig arette and pipe or hookah tobacco, chewing tobacco or snuff, and the word ‘ manufacturer’ shall be construed accordingly and shall include not only a person who employs hired labour in the production or manufacture of excisable goods, but also any person wh o engages in their production or manufacture on his own account if those goods are intended for sale and, in respect of gold and silver and products thereof, also any person dealing in gold and silver and products thereof who, whether or not he carries out any process of manufacture himself or through his employees or relatives, gets any process of manufacture carried out on his behalf by any person who is not in his employ, and any person so dealing in gold and silver and products thereof shall be deemed t o have manufactured for all purposes of this Act, all products of gold or silver in which he deals in any capacity whatever. (Emphasis provided) This court has , in several judgments, enunciated certain principles for adjudging what cons titutes ‘manufacture’ within the purview of the scheme envisaged in the Central Excise s Act.

[30] Some of the leading principles in this regard are cited here for ready reference : i. The Central Excise s Act enlarges the scope of the word ‘manufacture’ to such acts , processes, works , and repair which may not generally be covered by the word literally.6 ii. The word ‘manufacture’ includes any process incidental or ancillary to the completion of a manufactured product and any process of re -manufacture, remaking, recondi tioning or repair and the process of packing or repacking such product.7 iii.

[31] It is not necessary that any new article may be produced in this process. The article may even remain the same but the processing may make it a finished good different in quality or utility from the original one.8 iv. A process in which goods , though remain same , are made marketable and are, therefore, regarded by the purchasing public as different articles having a positive and specific use in their new state .9 v.

[32] The definition of the w ord ‘manufacture’ contained in the Central Excise s Act is not an absolute one but a qualified 6 Assistant Collector of Central Excise v. Orient Straw Board (PTCL 1992 CL. 38). 7 ibid. 8 ibid. 9 Superintendent of Central Excise v. Faqir M uhammad (PLD 1959 W.P. (Rev.) 103), Collector of Customs v.

[33] Mahboob Industries (2006 PTD 730). Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 10 one, and thus leave s ample scope for enlarging the scope of the definition.10 In the neighbouring jurisdiction, the Supreme Court of India has also rendered vari ous judgment s explaining the scope and extent of the term ‘manufacture ’ as provided under the Indian Central Excise Act, 1944 , and one of the leading judgments in this regard is Servo -Med Industries v .

[34] Commissioner of Central Excise11, wherein the Court after making an exhaustive survey of the caselaw on the subject laid down the general principle s relating to what constitutes ‘manufacture ’ in terms of the Indian Central Excise Act, 1944 , thus : (1) Where the goods remain exactly the same even after a particula r process, there is obviously no manufacture involved.

[35] Processes which remove foreign matter from goods complete in themselves and/or processes which clean goods that are complete in themselves fall within this category. (2) Where the goods remain essenti ally the same after the particular process, again there can be no manufacture. This is for the reason that the original article continues as such despite the said process and the changes brought about by the said process. (3) Where the goods are transform ed into something different and/or new after a particular process, but the said goods are not marketable.

[36] Examples within this group are the Brakes India case and cases where the transformation of goods having a shelf life which is of extremely small durat ion. In these cases also no manufacture of goods takes place. (4) Where the goods are transformed into goods which are different and/or new after a particular process, such goods being marketable as such.

[37] It is in this category that manufacture of goods c an be said to take place. In the above case, the matter related to syringes and needles purchased in bulk from the open market . The syringes and needles would then be sterilized. One syringe and one needle in an unassembled form would be put in a printed p lastic pouch and the plastic pouches so packed were sold to an industrial customer.

[38] The Indian Supreme Court concluded that the process of sterilization did not produce a transformation in the original articles leading to new articles known to the market a s such and, 10 Federation of Pakistan v. M/s Noori Trading Corporation (PTCL 1992 CL. 363). 11 (2015) 14 SCC 47. Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 11 therefore, t he sterilization of syringes and needles for medical use would not amount to the process of ‘manufacture’ , as syringes and needles would remain syringes and needles even after sterilization. 15.

[39] Relevant to the case in hand are t he cases falling under the first category . The Indian Supreme Court was of the view that to remove foreign matters from the goods or to cleanse the same would not fall within the purview of the term ‘manufacture ’. The said finding of the Court was based on th e judgment of Mineral Oil Corporation v .

[40] CCE, Kanpur Manu .12 The essential fac ts of that case were that the used transformer oil was processed for removal of impurities to reclaim it as transformer oil , as in the present case. The Court on finding that no new and distinct commodity came into existence, as a result of the process undertaken “[b]oth before and after the said processes ” came to the conclusion , “transformer oil remained as transformer oil .” We are afraid this judgment of the Supreme Court of Ind ia would not come to the rescue of the present appellant , as the very definition of the term ‘manufacture ’ in the Central Excise Act, 1944 of India and that of Pakistan are distinct.

[41] In this regard , a comparison of the two illustrates the ir stark distingui shing features. ‘Manufacture ’ as defin ed in Central Excise Act of India ‘Manufacture ’ as defin ed in Central Excise s Act of Pakistan "manufacture" includes any process - (i) incidental or ancillary to the completion of a manufactured pro - duct; and (ii) which is specified in relation to any goods in the Section or Chapter notes of [the Fourth Schedule] as amounting to manufactur e; or; (iii) which, in relation to the goods specified in the Third Schedule, involves packing or repacking of such goods in a uni t container or ‘manufacture’ includes any process incidental or ancillary to the completion of a manufactured product and any process of re - manufacture, remakin g, reconditioning or repair and the process of packing or repacking such product; and, in relation to tobacco, includes the preparation of cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, biris, cigarette and pipe or hookah tobacco, chewing tobacco or snuff, and the word ‘ma nufacturer’ shall be construed accordingly and shall 12 1999 (114) E.L.T. 166 . (Civil appeal from this judgment was dismissed by the Indian Supreme Court) Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 12 labeling or relabelling of containers including the declaration or alteration of retail sale price on it or adoption of any other treatment on the goods to render the product marketable to the consumer. (iv) which is specified in relation to any goods by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, as amounting to manufacture, and the word "manufacturer" shall be construed accordingly and shall include not only a person who employs hired labour in the production or manufac ture of excisable goods, but also any person who engages in their production or manufacture on his own account include not only a person who employs hired labour in the production or manufacture of excisable goods, but also any person who engages in their production or manufacture on his own account if those good s are intended for sale and, in respect of gold and silver and products thereof, also any person dealing in gold and silver and products thereof who, whether or not he carries out any process of manufacture himself or through his employees or relatives, ge ts any process of manufacture carried out on his behalf by any person who is not in his employ, and any person so dealing in gold and silver and products thereof shall be deemed to have manufactured for all purposes of this Act, all products of gold or sil ver in which he deals in any capacity whatever.

[42] Keeping in view the above definition s of the term ‘manufacture ’ under the two legal regimes, we note that the definition of the term provided und er the Central Excise s Act of Pakistan is more expansive and exhaustive in scope , as it includ es ‘any process of re -manufacture, remaking, reconditioning or repair’ .

[43] These words expand ing the term ‘manufacture’ are visibly absent in the definition of the said term provide d in the Central Excise Act, 1944 of India . It is this very reason that the Indian Supreme Court in the case s of Servo -Med Industries and Mineral Oil Corporation (supra) deemed it necessary to hold that goods which undergo a process to remove foreign matter or to cleanse the same , would not come with in the purview of ‘manufacture ’.

[44] However, under the excise law of Pakistan, we note that the situation would be otherwise. Transformer oil was being reclaimed in the case before us. Reclamation of transformer oil is a process in which impurities are remove d from the used transformer oil so that it becomes usable as transformer oil again.

[45] It is akin to ‘repair’ which means renewal or restoration by renewal.13 So, when transformer oil, which in its waste form could not be used owing to 13 LexisNexis Tax Law Dictionary, 2016, LexisNexis. Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 13 the impurities developed therein, is put back to a usable condi tion, an activity of ‘reconditioning ’ or ‘repair ’ takes place.

[46] We have seen that the Central Excise s Act has enlarged the scope of the word manufacture to among other things ‘recondition’ or ‘repair’ which may otherwi se not be covered by the word ‘manufacture’ in its ordinary dictionary meaning . Thus, it is but apparent that indeed the appellant’s activity of carrying out the process of reclamation of transformer oil would constitute ‘manufacture’ within the contemplat ion of section 2(25) of the Central Excise s Act.

[47] Manufacturer 16. Next, we come to the third important component of excise duty – who is liable to pay. The charging -section 3 of the Central Excise s Act and rule 7 of the Central Excise Rules mandate that th e person, who produces or manufactures ‘excisable goods’ , or renders or provides ‘excisable services’ , enumerated in First Schedule of the Central Excise s Act, is liable to make the payment of excise duty .

[48] The a ppellant ’s stance is that it was acting under an agreement to provid e ‘services ’ of reclaiming transformer oil for WAPDA, and hence not liable to pay excise duty; while the Revenue insists that the appellant was the ‘manufacturer ’ of reclaimed transformer oil , hence , liable to pay the excise duty. 17.

[49] Admittedly, the appellant and WAPDA are two distinct and separate legal persons, who had entered into an agreement, whereby waste transformer oil, the so -called raw material , was provided free of cost by WAPDA to the appellant for reclamation of transf ormer oil . The title of waste transformer oil during the entire process of reclamation remained with WAPDA.

[50] Therefore , the transfer of possession of waste transformer oil by WAPDA to the appellant under a contract , so that the same is reclaimed and made us eable , and thereafter , is returned to Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 14 WAPDA , would constitute ‘bailment’ within the contemplation of section 148 of the Contract Act, 1872. 18.

[51] In such circumstances, when the appellant did not have title over waste transformer oil and was reclaiming the same for WAPDA under a contract , it cannot be described as the real ‘manufacturer’ , while the capacity of WAPDA, the real owner of the waste as well as of reclaimed transformer oil, can hardly be described otherwise. 19.

[52] Viewed from another perspective, we note that, unlike the Sales Tax Act, the Central Excise s Act does not define the term ‘manufacturer’ separately, and there is only a pointer indicating the meaning of the said term in the definition of the term ‘manufacture’ . Let us revisit the definiti on of ‘manufacture’ provided in the Central Excise s Act at relevant time, which read as follows: 2(25) ‘manufacture’ includes any process incidental or ancillary to the completion of a manufactured product and any process of re -manufacture, remaking, reco nditioning or repair and the process of packing or repacking such product; and, in relation to tobacco, includes the preparation of cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, biris, cigarette and pipe or hookah tobacco, chewing tobacco or snuff, and the word ‘manufactu rer’ shall be construed accordingly and shall include not only a person who employs hired labour in the production or manufacture of excisable goods, but also any person who engages in their production or manufacture on his own account if those goods are i ntended for sale and, in respect of gold and silver and products thereof, also any person dealing in gold and silver and products thereof who, whether or not he carries out any process of manufacture himself or through his employees or relatives, gets any process of manufacture carried out on his behalf by any person who is not in his employ, and any person so dealing in gold and silver and products thereof shall be deemed to have manufactured for all purposes of this Act, all products of gold or silver in which he deals in any capacity whatever. (Emphasis provided) The meaning of the word ‘manufacturer’ as provided in the highlighted part of th e above stated definition of ‘manufacture’ appears to be inclusive , with the potential of enlarging the scope there of.

[53] We also note that the provision itself adds two explanatory instances of persons , who would also be included in the meaning of the word ‘ manufacturer ’. Referral to these instances starts with the words ‘not only’ followed by a Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 15 description of the first of the instances.

[54] Then, there are the words ‘but also’ followed by the description of the other instance. The construction ‘not only....but a lso’ is called a correlative conjunction and is used to present two related pieces of information, with the s econd one being more surprising or, we may say , different than or independent of the first.14 Use of a comma before ‘but also’ suggests that a new or different category starts after the comma, and the words ‘if those goods are intended for sale ’ found at the end of the description of two instances relate to the latter category only.

[55] It may, thus, be said that the explanatory instances of the word ‘manufacturer’ leave us with the following two categories: i. a person who employs hired labour in the production or manufacture of excisable goods ; and ii. a person who engages in the production or manufacture of excisable goods on his own account if those goods are intended for sale.

[56] It is not disputed that both the appellant and WAPDA were not engaged in reclamation of transformer oil for sale, so as to fall in category (ii) of manufacturer . This would leave us to consider , whether the appellant or WAPDA w ould f all within the other stated category (i) of manufacturers . As noted above, the waste transformer oil was provided by WAPDA to the appellant, and the same remained the property of WAPDA during the entire reclam ation process .

[57] In such a scenario, t he role of the appellant in the entire reclamation process could at most be described as render ing services for the reclama tion of transformer oil by providing ‘labour’ for ‘hire’ to WAPDA under a contractual arrangement. 20. Conventionally, the word ‘hire’ is assoc iated with the act of employment , rather than being a reward for services, however, with time, 14 The Britannica Dictionary. <https://www.britannica.com/dictionary/eb/qa/not -only-but-also> Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 16 and that too when referred to in the commercial use , it is now even applied to services .15 Similarly , the term ‘labour’ ordinarily include s every possible human e xertion, mental and physical.

[58] However, over time , the term ‘labour’ has been adjudged to include services performed for a corporation engaged in the manufacturing process.16 Thus, w here one furnishes materials to be manufactured by the other, according to specifications defined by him, the contract is one for ‘labour’.17 A person who himself does not engage in the production or manufacture of excisable goods , but hire s the labour of another person , whether natural or juristic, on contract for this purpose , therefore falls within the scope of the first category of manufacturers mentioned above. 21.

[59] Viewed in such perspective, the role and capacity of WAPDA engaging the services of the appellant for reclaiming transformer oil on an agreed consideration (charges) would fall within the purview of ‘manufacturer’ described in category (i) above , described in the definition of ‘manufacture’ provided in section 2(25) of the Central Excise s Act.

[60] The appellant only provided the services to WAPDA for reclama tion of transf ormer oil . No doubt, reclamation of transformer oil is a manufacturing process within the meaning of the term ‘manufacture ’, as provided in section 2(25) of the Central Excise s Act and the manufacturing of transformer oil is also an ‘excisable good ’ under the Central Excise s Act.18 However, excise duty on this ‘excisable good ’ is to be paid by the manufacturer ,19 not by the service provider .

[61] As the appellant is not a ‘manufacturer ’, it is not liable to pay the excise duty on reclaimed transformer oil , an ‘excisable good ’. 15 Baughman v. Sterrett Operating Service (173 A. 38, 39, 167 Md. 50). 16 Appeal of Black (47 N.W. 342, 343, 83 Mich. 513). 17 United Iron Works v. Standard Brass Casting Co. (231 P. 567, 569, 69 Cal.App. 384). 18 First Schedule. 19 Central Excise Rules 19 44, r 7.

[62] Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 17 22. The appellant provided ‘services ’ for reclaiming transformer oil to the ‘manufacturer ’ - WAPDA . We need to see whether such ‘service ’ is an ‘excisable service ’ under the Central Excise s Act specified in the First Schedule to the Central Excise s Act. Perusal of the First Schedule to the Central Excise s Act shows that the services provided while carrying out reclamation of waste transformer oil or, for that matter , any waste oil are not specific ally mention ed in the table of ‘excisable services’ provided in the Schedule .

[63] However, there is an omnibus heading ; 9809.0000 titled “Services provided or rendered by persons engaged in contractual execution of work or furnishing supplies ”. An argument could be advanced that the activity of reclamatio n of transformer oil performed by the appellant could be considered as ‘work ’ so as to fall within the meaning of ‘contractual execution of work ’.

[64] However, no definite finding can be rendered by this Court on this point, and that too at this stage , when th e same was not put to the appellant in the Show Cause Notice. 23. Thus, we conclude with regard to the stance of the Revenue in the Show Cause Notice, which asserted that the appellant was liable to pay excise duty for the reclamation of transformer oil f or WAPDA , that the same is not legally sustainable .

[65] Sales Tax 24. Moving on to sales tax, we note that like any other indirect taxes , the incidence of this tax is also passed on to the consumer . But unlike the Central Excise s Act, the Sales Tax Act is not restricted to specified goods and specified services provided in its schedule , rather it encompasses in its purview ‘supply ’ of all goods other than exempted goods .

[66] The definition of ‘ taxable goods’ as provided in section 2(39) and Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 18 the relevant portion of the charging section, that is section 3 of the Sales Tax Act, read as under: 2(39) “taxable goods” means all goods other than those which have been exempted under section 13 . 3.

[67] Scope of tax (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, there shall be cha rged, levied and paid a tax known as sales tax at the rate of fifteen per cent of the value of – (a) taxable supplies made in Pakistan by a registered person in the course or furtherance of any taxable activity carried on by him; and (b) goods imported int o Pakistan What we gather from the above provision is that the intent of the legislature is to encompass two events to charge the tax : first, when taxable supplies are made in the course of furtherance of a taxable activity carried out by a registered per son in Pakistan ; second, when the goods are imported in to Pakistan .

[68] The amount of sales tax is ad valorem , based on the value of the taxable supplies made in Pakistan or the goods imported into Pakistan. Regarding the responsibility of paying the sales tax, section 3(3) clearly identifie s that this would be the person making the supply or importing the goods into Pakistan.

[69] The said provision is cited here for ease of reference : Section 3(3) The liability to pay the tax shall be, (a) in the case of supply of goods in Pakistan, of the person making the supply, and (b) in the case of goods imported into Pakistan, of the person importing the goods . In the present case , the issue for determination does not concern the goods imported into Pakistan, but relat es to a taxable supply , which the Revenue asserts the appellant made . 25.

[70] In order to charg e sales tax , the taxing event under the charging - section is when a registered person makes a taxable supply in the course or furtherance of any taxable activity carried on by him. The matter would best be understood when we consider the import of the four terms, Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 19 supply , taxable goods, taxable supply and taxable activity, as defined in the Sales Tax Act, which are reproduced here for ready reference: 2(33) “supply ” includes sale, lease (excluding financial or operating lease) or other disposition of goods in furtherance of business carried out for consideration and also includes – (a) putting to private, business or non -business use of goods acquired, produced or manufactured in the course of business; (b) auction or disposal of goods to satisfy a debt owed by a person; (c) possession of taxable goods held immediately before a person ceases to be a registered person; and (d) such other transaction as the Federal go vernment may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify. 2(39) “taxable goods” means all goods other than those which have been exempted under section 13. 2(41) “taxable supply” means a supply of taxable goods made in Pakistan by an importer, manuf acturer, wholesaler (including dealer), distributor or retailer other than a supply of goods which is exempt under section 13 and includes a supply of goods chargeable to tax at the rate of zero per cent under section 4. 2(35) “taxable activity” means any activity which is carried on by any person, whether or not for a pecuniary profit, and involves in whole or in part, the supply of goods to any other person, whether for any consideration or otherwise, and includes any activity carried on in the form of a business, trade or manufacture.

[71] On a careful reading of the above definitions, we note that the tread of the tax ing event starts when a person makes a supply of taxable goods , the definition whereof has been expansively provided with various activities be yond the sales of goods, and further, by inserting the words “other disposition of goods ” in the definition of the term .

[72] In such circumstances, a case may be set up against the appellant , of making a supply of transformer oil to WAPDA. What is crucial is w hether the supply of transformer oil made by the appellant met the test of being a taxable supply made in the course or furtherance of any taxable activity carried on by the appellant . 26.

[73] The stance of the Revenue in the Show Cause Notice i s that the appellant was manufacturing transformer oil at its reclamation plant , and thereby carrying out a taxable supply . To bring a supply within the scope of taxable supply , it is essential that the same is made by ‘an Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 20 importer, manufacturer, wholesaler (including d ealer), distributor or retailer ’.

[74] Admittedly, the process of reclamation of transformer oil was ‘manufacture ’ within the purview of said term provided in section 2( 25) of the Central Excise s Act. However, the term ‘manufacture’ as defined in section 2(16) of the Sales Tax Act , has a mark ed difference from the definition of the same term provided in the Central Excise s Act.

[75] To appreciate the distinction , let us review the definition s provided under the two enactments: Sales Tax Act Central Excise s Act 2(16) “manufacture” or “produce” includes – (a) any process in which an article singly or in combination with other articles, materials, components, is either converted into another distinct article or product or is so changed, transformed or reshaped that i t becomes capable of being put to use differently or distinctly and includes any process incidental or ancillary to the completion of a manufactured product; (b) process of printing, publishing, lithography and engraving; and (c) process and operations of assembling, mixing, cutting, diluting, botling, packaging, repacking or preparation of goods in any other manner; 2(25) ‘manufacture’ includes any process incidental or ancillary to the completion of a manufactured product and any process of re-manufact ure, remaking, reconditioning or repair and the process of packing or repacking such product; and, in relation to tobacco, includes the preparation of cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, biris, cigarette and pipe or hookah tobacco, chewing tobacco or snuff, ………… ………… (Emphasis provided) A watchful reading of the above definitions under t he two enactments reveals that the one provided under the Central Excise s Act has a more extensive scope , as it includes ‘ any process of re -manufacture, rema king, reconditioning or repair’ , which are not provided in the definition of the said term provided under the Sales Tax Act .

[76] This distinctive feature has already been dilated upon in the precedents of this Court, two of the leading judgments in this regard are as under: Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 21 Chairman FBR v . Al-Technique Corporation20 In this case, the respondent used to sterilise syringes and other medical equipment which were provided to it by other entities.

[77] The appellant argue d that the respondent was liable to pay sales t ax on the sterilisation process and that the same amount ed to manufacturing. The Court h eld: The syringes remain syringes after sterilisation. Therefore, a bare reading of all the aforementioned definitions taxable in their legal and usual context makes i t manifest that the process of sterilisation of medical/surgical products does not fall within the meaning of ‘manufacture’ as provided in Section 2(16) thus the respondent is not a ‘manufacturer’ under section 2(17) and is not making a ‘taxable supply’ as per section 2(41) and therefore cannot be charged to sales tax under Section 3 of the Act.

[78] Deputy Collector, Centra l Excise v. Tyrex Pakistan Ltd.21 In this case, the respondents were engaged in the busines s of retreading tyres and receive d only the rep air charges. T he appellants argued that this process amounted to manufacturing. The Court held: [T]he combined effect of Section 2(11) and Section 3 of the Act is that the sale tax can be collected from the production of those goods which are produced or manufactured.

[79] The extended definition in the Excises and Salt Act does not apply to the present case… Even according to the dictionary meaning [of the word ‘retread’ in Websters Dictionary] “anything used again after repairs does not mean that the goods ha ve been shaped int o a new product. 27. In the present case, the appellant only reclaimed or repaired transformer oil.

[80] During the process of reclamation, impurities are removed from used transformer oil. Th is activity does not involve conversion of any art icle singly or in combination with other articles into another distinct article or product. Nor does the process change or transform transformer oil in a way rendering it capable of being put to use differently or distinctly.22 The appellant returned the sa me good, that is transformer oil, to the owner of that good, WAPDA, after charging the latter for the repair work done by it.

[81] The process of reclamation of transformer oil by the appellant , thus, does not fall within the meaning of ‘manufacture’ as provide d in section 2(16) of the Sales Tax Act and, in 20 PLD 2017 SC 99. 21 PTCL 1996 CL. 358. 22 Chairman FBR v. Al -Technique Corporation (PLD 2017 SC 99). Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 22 sequel, the appellant is not a ‘manufacturer’ as defined in section 2(17) .

[82] As the appellant is not a manufacturer, it does not get caught up in the activity of making a ‘ taxable supply’ as per section 2(41) for only a supply of taxable goods by an importer, manufacturer, wholesaler (including dealer), distributor or retailer falls within ‘ taxable supply’ under that section.

[83] The appellant , not belonging to any of the said capacities , therefore , cannot be charge d to sales tax under section 3 of the Sales Tax Act. Conclusion 28. To summarise the foregoing discussion, the conclusion follow s: Excise Duty (i) The appellant is not a manufacturer of transformer oil within the contemplation of section 2(25) of the Central Excises Act, 1944 read with rule 7 of the Central Excise Rules, 19 44. (ii) The appellant is , therefore , not liable to pay the excise duty for reclaiming (manufacturing) transformer oil , as claimed by the Revenue in the Show Cause Notice . (ii) The services provided by the appellant for reclaiming transformer oil may have come within the purview of excisable services provided under heading 9809.0000 in the table of services provided in the First Schedule of the Central Excises Act .

[84] However, no definite finding c an be rendered on this issue by this Court , and that too at this stage , when the same was not put to the appellant to respond to in the Show Cause Notice. Sales Tax (i) The appellant is not a manufacturer within the purview of section 2 (17) of the Sales Tax Act, 1990 .

[85] The supply of reclaimed transformer oil by the appellant to WAPDA, thus , does not come within the scope of taxable supplies under the Sale Tax Act. (ii) The appellant is , therefore , not liable to pay the sales tax as claimed by the Revenue in the Show Cause Notice. 29. Given the above, we find that the true purpo se, as well as the distinctive attributes of the terms ‘manufacture’ and ‘manufacturer’ envisaged in the two taxing statutes — the Central Excise s Act and the Civil Appeal No. 458 of 2017 23 Sales Tax Act — were not corr ectly appreciated by the forums below leading to flawed conclusions regarding the very chargeability of central excise duty and sales tax on the appellant for reclaiming the transformer oil for WAPDA . 30.

[86] In the circumstances, we find the impugned judgme nt of the High Court , the orders of the Tax Authorities , as well as th e ruling of the Tribunal , are not in accordance with the law . This warrant s the positive interference of this Court. Accordingly, the present appeal is allowed, and consequently the impu gned orders of the High Court and all three adjudicatory forums are set aside .

[87] Judge Judge Judge Announced in Open Court on 8th December, 2022 Judge Islamabad Approved for reporting Arif