Case No: C.A.1498/2018
Case Title: Muhammad Salman v. Naveed Anjum, etc
Subject: Election-Provincial Assembly/Eligibility of Candidature
Judge: Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar
Judgment Date: 17-08-2021
Upload Date: 17-08-2021
Citations: 2021 SCMR 1675
SC Citations: 2021 SCP 244
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.a._1498_2018.pdf

[1] judgment that “the Commission no longer has the p ower to declare the poll in a constituency (or in any one or more polling stations) void except in the special case.” To my humble understanding, the power of the Commission to declare the poll at one or more polling stations or in the whole constituency void, being ancillary and incidental, is implied in the power conferred on the Commission by Section 9(1) to declare that grave illegalities or violations of the provisions of the Act or the Rules have materially affected the result of the poll and in its power to call upon the voters in the polling station or stations concerned or in the whole constituency, as the case may be, to recast their votes.

[2] This was also the mandate of Section 103AA of the erstwhile law, i.e., the Representation of the People Act 1976. It is obvious that without declaring the result of the earlier poll(s) void (i.e., cancelled) the Commission cannot call upon the voters to recast their votes – the result of two polls cannot co -exist.

[3] Therefore, it i s inevitable for the Commission to declare the result of the earlier poll(s) void before calling upon the voters to recast their votes. Civil Appeal No., etc 2 3. My learned brother has held that Section 9(1) read with its “Explanation ” specifies three conditions in which the Commission could exercise its jurisdiction under t hat Section, namely; (i) grave illegalities, (ii) violation of the provisions of the Act or the rules, and (iii) implementation of an agreement restraining women from casting their votes, while Section 103A A(1) of the erstwhile law stipulated only the first two conditions .

[4] I, with respect , differ and find that the conditions still continue to be two under the new law , as were the case under the old law: (i) grave illegalities, and (ii) violation of the provisions of the Act or the rules . “The implementation of an agreement restraining women from casting their votes ” is not, in my opinion, an independent third condition rather is part of the first two condition s.

[5] The word ‘including’ used in Section 9(1) has led me to this finding. The Election Act contains several provisions to ensure par ticipation of women in the election process1, and p reventing women from exercising their right to vote has been made an offence of corrup t practice under its Section 167(a) read with Section 170(vii).

[6] The implementation of an agreement restraining women from casting their votes is thus a grave illegality and violation of the provisions of the Act, which materially affects the result of the poll. 4. My next concern is as to the finding of my learned brother to the effect that the “Explanation ” to Section 9(1) can render in some “special case” the entire election in the constituency void meaning thereby that fresh elections shall be held in the constituency, as opposed to declaring the poll(s) void resulting in recasting of the votes for the same contesting candidates afresh.

[7] In my humble understanding, the “Explanation ” to Section 9(1) serves the ordinary purpose that an Explanation is supposed to serve , i.e., to facilitate the proper understanding of a provision . The power of the Commission under S ection 9(1) is only to declare the poll at one or more polling statio ns or in the whole constituency void, which then leads t o recasting of the votes for the same candidates.

[8] The grounds of declaring the polls to be void are: (i) grave illegalities , or (ii) viola tion of the provisions of the Act or the rules including “the 1 (See Section 12(c) about measures for public awareness regarding participation of women in elections, Section 47 about special measures for enrolment of women voters, Section 91(1) about preparing statement about turnout of women voters, Section 91(3) about making special report regarding restraining the women voters from exercising their right to vote, etc.) Civil Appeal No., etc 3 implementation of an agreement restraining women from casting their votes .” The Explanation simply adds a presumption in the context of the ground of “implementation of an agreement restraining women from casting their votes” and provides that if the turnout of women voters is less than ten percent of the total vote s polled in a constituency , the C ommission may presume that the women voters have been re strained through an agreement from casting their votes.

[9] In pith and substa nce, this is all what the Explanation explains . The word “election” used in the Explanation is though some what confusing , but in order to harmonize and balance the meaning and import of the “Explanation” and also to keep it within the fold of the main provision , the word “election ” may be read to mean “poll”; as the meaning of an Explanation cannot generally go beyond the controlling main provision.

[10] The Explanation to Section 9(1), in my understanding , does not attract any “special case,” where the “election” instead of the “poll” in the whole constituency may be declared void. However, we are not faced with the interpr etation of the word “election” in this case, therefore , it is best to leave it to be considered more ela borately in an appropriate case, where the facts of the case would so require.