Case No: C.A.2206/2005
Case Title: Civil Appeal No.2206/2005, Civil Appeal No.721/2006, Criminal Appeal No.304/2003, Civil Petition No.459 of 2006 and Suo Moto Case No.8/2006
Subject: N/A
Judge: Mr. Justice Tassaduq Hussain Jillani
Judgment Date: 15-12-2006
Upload Date: 15-12-2006
Citations: PLD 2007 SC 323
SC Citations: 2006 SCP 10
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/JR_PMDC_VS_Ziauddin_Medical_University_Others.pdf

[1] order dated 03.07.2003 of the Lahore Hi gh Court, Rawalpindi Bench, passed in Crl.Org. No.107-W/200 3 Dr. Sohail Karim Hashmi, etc Appellants Versus Healers Education Society, etc Respondents For the Appellant : Mr. M. Bilal, Sr.ASC For the Respondent : Mr. M. Munir Peracha, ASC Mehr Khan Malik, AOR Ch.

[2] Akhtar Ali, AO R In Civil Petition No.459 of 2006 On appeal from the order dated 25.05.2006 of the Hi gh Court of Sindh, Karachi, passed in C.P. No.D -  Pakistan Medical & Denta l Council Appellant Versus Federation of Pakistan & others Respondents For the Petitioners : Mr. M. Akram Sheikh, Sr.ASC Assisted by Barrister Rahil Kamran Sh.

[3] Mr. M. A. Zaidi, AOR For the Respondents : Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan, ASC Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR In S.M.Case. No.8 of 2006 Fraud by a Fake Medical College i.e. Independent Medical & De ntal College, Faisalabad For the Applicant : Malik Qamar Afzal, ASC Barrister Ch. M. Jameel, ASC On Court’s Call : Sohail Karim Hashmi (Secy.

[4] PMDC) Fazal Ahmed, President PMDC Ms. Nahida Mehboob Elahi, DAG Raja Saeed Akram, Asst.AG, Pb. Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR Mr. Ejaz Muhammad Khan, AO R Date of hearing : 28.11.2006 JUDGMENT Tassaduq Hussain Jillani, J -. Medicine has always been a noble, rewarding and cherishe d profession.

[5] No wonder, down the ages, some prompted by mundane considerations, som e inspired by idealism and so me by the belief that heali ng is a divine virtue, young men an d women in great numbers have c hosen it as a career. By the nature of their calling Doctor s have been respected, adored and at times subjected to, not too flattering a comment.

[6] Th e poet John Owen was not very off the mark when he said: - "God and the doctor we alike adore But only when in danger, not before; The danger o’er, both are alike requited, God is forgotten, and the Doctor slighted". Driven by lofty objectives, m otivated to achieve higher standa rds of professional excellenc e in Medical & Dental research as also to prov ide quality services to the needy and to ward of f the element of "slight", in public comment, efforts were ma de to establish regulatory bodie s all over the world.

[7] In the Indian subcontinent was passed the Indian Medical Council Act 1934 which formed a body by the name of I ndian Medical Council. The Pakistan Medica l Council of 1951 replaced by Pakistan Medi cal & Dental Counc il established under th e Pakistan Medical & Dental Council Ordin ance, 1962 are successor bodies to the sai d Council. 2.

[8] Responding to the public demand many private institutions have been established to trai n and impart medical training and award degree s in a medical qualifica tion. The attempt by th e Medical & Dental Council to keep a balance be tween the mandate of law and the demand o f institutions seeking recognition of their respective medical qualifications have led to conflic t of interests and litigation.

[9] The cases in hand are reflec tive of this dilemma in whic h following issues have cropped up for consideration. What is the nature and import of the concept of recognition of a medical qualification as contemplate d in Section 11 of the Pakista n Medical & Dental Coun cil Ordinance, 1962? What is the nature of ‘consultation’ with the Council by the Federa l Government, which the law require s the latter to have before passin g an order under various pr ovisions of the Ordinance? Whether every chartered Univer sity having a medical faculty i s entitled to representation in the Pa kistan Medical & Dental Council i n terms of Section 3 of the Ordinance?

[10] Whether the teaching staff of each Medical & Dental Institution i n Pakistan is entitled to representation in accord with Section 3 (f) of th e Ordinance? Whether the Pakistan Medical & Dental Council is empowered to as k for information, make queries, i ssue directions and take other step s prescribed in law to carry o ut the purposes of the Ordinance? 3.

[11] The afore-mentioned issues have arisen out of following set of facts and circumstances. 4. In Civil Appeal No.2206 of 2005, Pakistan Medical & Dent al Council has challenged th e order dated 07.09.2005, passed by a learned Division Bench of the High Court of Sindh Karachi, vide which the co nstitution petition (C.P.D.

[12] No.371 of 2005) was allowed & it wa s held and directed as under:- "We are of the considered opinion t hat the Petitioner No.2 Universit y as well as the Medical Instituti ons owned by the Trusts whic h Petitioners No.1 and 3 represent are e ntitled to be represented on th e Council of the Respondent No.1.

[13] Indeed the Respondent No.1 i s entitled to seek such information as may be necessary or caus e inspection of medical or dental institution as is permissible by sectio n 20 and 21 and seek compliance of Regulations framed under sectio n 33(2), it cannot take away the peti tioners’ right to be represented o n the Council till such time that their recognition ar e revoked.

[14] We , therefore, direct the Respondent No.1 to hold elections within 0 2 months from the announcement of our short order dated 07.09.2005 Above are the reasons of the aforesaid order". 5. In Civil Appeal No. 721 of 2006, Pakistan Medical & Dental Council has challenged th e judgment dated 10.03.2006 passed (in C.P.

[15] No.D -1664 of 2005) by a learned Division Benc h of the same learned High Cour t, vide which the earlier judgm ent/direction referred to in th e preceding paragraph was reiterated and the Pakistan Medical Council was directed t o convene a meeting for organizing the el ection of members for representing th e respondent/petitioner in the Council in terms of Section 3(1) (b) and 3(1) (f) of th e Ordinance. 6.

[16] In Civil Petition No.459 of 2006, Pakistan Medical & Dental Council has challenged th e order dated 25.05.2006 passed in C.P. No.D -, whereby the learned High Court o f Sindh, Karachi held that since the Council did not hold elections in terms of the order passe d in C.P.No.D-371 of 2005 (referre d to in para 4 above), petition er Nos.1 to 3 & 5 to 8 (No w respondent Nos.2 to 8 before this Court) shall have a right to participate in the meetings o f the Pakistan Medical & Dental Council unless the Notifica tion dated 18.04.2006 of Ministry of Health declaring them elec ted as members of the Council under section 3(1)(b) and (f) is set aside. 7.

[17] In Criminal Appeal No.304 of 2003, f iled by Dr. Sohail Karim Hashmi, Secretary, Pakistan Medical & Dental Counc il, the charge sheet dated 03.07.2003, framed by a learne d Division Bench of the Lahore High Court, ha s been challenged, wherein the learne d Division Bench held that prima-facie the appellant was guilty of violating the undertaking given before the High Court in Intra Court Appeal No.153 of 2003, with regard to carrying out inspection of a medical ins titution.

[18] It issued show cause notice to the appellant and Dr. Riffat Ansari, Assistant Secretary, Pakistan Medical & Dental Coun cil, as to why they should not be punished for comm itting contempt of the Court and the reply was sough t within four days. 8. In Suo Moto Case No.8, some students of the independent Medi cal & Dental College, Faisalabad, addressed a petition to the Hon’ ble Chief Justice of Pakistan, levelling serious allegations against the College administra tion and submitted that on account of omissions and commissions of the College, the students pursuing their professional Degree/Courses are not certain about their future as the me dical qualification being given by the responden t had not been accorded recognition by the Pakist an Medical & Dental Council.

[19] It has been prayed that the Pakistan Medical & Dental Council be directed to close down the College and accommodate the students in other recognized Medical Institutions of the country. 9. The Pakistan Medical & Dent al Council is a st atutory body and in term s of the Pakistan Medical & Dental Council Ordin ance, 1962, it is a regulator y authority for the universities having Medical & Dental Faculti es and Institutions in Pakistan.

[20] The Council has been of the view that only those institutions and the faculties of such medical universities are entitled to be represented in the Council which are im parting education and training for the grant o f medical qualifications which have been acco rded recognition by the Federal Government in consultation with the Pakistan Medical & De ntal Council in terms of Section 11 of the Ordinance.

[21] It has maintained that the elec tions for the membership of the Council fro m amongst the Medical faculties of universities and Medical Institutions have to be conducte d by the Council. Reference was made to Sec tion 3(1)(b) & (f), Sections 4 and 11 of the Pakistan Medical & Dental Council Ordinance, 1962.

[22] The Council has be en jealous of its mandate to carry out inspections of the Medi cal & Dental Institutions & their examination centers with a view to ensuring uniform quality and standard of the medical education in Pakistan. Respondent Nos. 1 to 3 (in C.A. No.2206 of 2005), were petitioners before the learned High Court of Sindh ( in C.P.

[23] No.D-371 of 2005). Their precise case before the learned High Court was that all Medical a nd Dental Institutions recognized by the Federal Government have a right to be represented in the Council; that all the three respondent- institutions have been accorded recognition in terms of the Pakistan Medical & Dental Council Ordinance, 1962; that el ections were carried out by the respective institutions, an d therefore, having been elected by Medical fa culties, they have a right to be represented in the Medical Council.

[24] Civil Appeal No.721 of 2006 is directed against the order of the learned High Court of Sindh in which the same learned Bench reiterated its order passed in C.P. No.371 of 2005. The impugned orde r (in Civil Petition No .459 of 2006) date d 25.05.2006 was passed by a learned Division Be nch of the High Court of Sindh in which constitution petition of Re spondent Nos. 2 to 8 representing various medical institutions was allowed.

[25] In the said petition, filed by several representative s of medical institutions, it was alleged that notwithstanding the order passed in C.P. No.371 of 2005 by the Sindh High Court (which has been challenged in Civil A ppeal No.2206 of 2006) the Medical & Dental Council had not complied with the order on the ground that recognition granted to the medical institutions was provisional, therefore, they were not entitled to be represented on the Council. 10.

[26] Learned counsel for the appellant repr esenting the Pakistan Medical & Dental Council contended that the judgment of the learne d High Court of Sindh holding that respondents are entitled to be represented in the Council is not tenable as it does not appreciate the mandate and import of Section 3(1) (b) & (f) of the Pakis tan Medical & Dental Council Ordinance.

[27] Under these provis ions, only those faculties of me dical institutions have a righ t to be represented whose medical qualifica tions have been rec ognized by the Federal Government in consultation with the Pakis tan Medical & Dental Council. Referring to various provisions of the Pakistan Medical & Dental C ouncil Ordinance, 1962, learne d counsel maintained that the la wmakers have prescribed an elaborate procedure o f inspection/of inquiry and of inspection of examinations by the Council. 11.

[28] Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan, learned coun sel representing the private respondents, contended that under the Ordinance there is no requirement of recognition to a medical institution by the Federal Government which already stands affiliated with a Pakistan University established by law. He added that Ziauddin Medical University is a chartere d University and under section 3 (1)(b) of the Ordinance it has right to be represented in the Council without prior recognition in terms of S ection 11 of the Ordinance.

[29] He further adde d that the medical institutions ar e of two kinds i.e. firstly t hose which are merely imparting training and secondly those which are imparting training and granting medical degrees. So far as former institutions are concerned there is no concept of recognition by the Federal Government and the ins titutions which stan d affiliated with the Ziauddin Medical University also do not require recognition by the Federal Government as they do not gran t degrees and it is the University which grants degrees.

[30] He lastly submitted that since the faculties of medical institutions have held elections for me mbers who are to represent the m in the Pakistan Medical & Dental Council, they have a ri ght to be represented and the judgment of the learned High Court of Sindh is unexceptionable. Learned counsel also brought to the notice of this Court that th e medical qualifications being granted by respondents No.1 (Ziauddin Medical University) & No.2 (Fatima Jinnah Dental College an d Hospital Trust) have now been accorded r ecognition by the Federal Government in terms o f Section 11 of the Ordinance. 12.

[31] Mr. Tariq Mehmood, ASC, representing the Fatima Jinnah Dental College & Hospital Trust, submitted that the institution has been accorded recognition by the Federal Government and to its extent th ere is no live issue. 13. Mr. Aitzaz Ahsan, Sr.ASC, learned c ounsel representing Respondent No.3 (Sohai l Medical Trust) submitted that the institutions granting medical qualifications affiliated wit h a Pakistan University established under the la w need not be specifically mentioned in th e First Schedule of the Ordinance; that th e respondent-institution was granted provisiona l recognition by the Pakistan Medial & Dental Council; that the concept of provisiona l recognition is not alien to the Ordinance; that un der Section 23 of the Ordinance there is a concept of provisional registration of a medi cal practitioner; that by extending provisiona l recognition the Council obliged the respondent to invest a huge sum of money in thos e medical institutions and it was only with concurrence of the Co uncil that several student s were granted admissions in those instit utions.

[32] It would be rather harsh both to th e management and to the students to withdraw such recognition at this stage. He added that th e respondent-institution is training a nd imparting knowledge but the medical qualification is t o be granted by the University with whom the respondent-institution is affiliated which i s sufficient for the purposes of the Ordinance.

[33] He contended that there is no concept o f granting recognition to a Medical or a Dental Institution, the same was inse rted for the firs t time by Ordinance No.VII of 1999 which was promulgated on 25th May 1999. But it wa s never placed before the National Assembly / Parliament within the period stipulated unde r the Constitution and it lapsed.

[34] This according to him reflects the intention of the lawmake r i.e. to dispense with the requirement of prior approval and recognition by the Federa l Government to establish a me dical institution. Now the Ord inance contemplates recognitio n of medical qualification and not of a medical institution or a University. 14.

[35] Ms. Naheeda Mehboob Elahi, learned Deputy Attorney General, submitted that the righ t to confer degrees, diplomas, licenses or certific ates or other documents to "practise scientifi c Medical and Dental System" is with the authorities referred to in Section 3 of the Medical & Dental Degrees Ordinance, 198 2 and the Schedule thereunde r.

[36] She added that unless th e Medical or Dental qualification for which the respondents-institutions are imparting trainin g is recognized by the Federal G overnment in consultation with the Pakistan Medical & Denta l Council in terms of Section 11 of the Pakistan Medical & Dental Council Ordinance, 1962 these institutions can not seek re presentation in the Council. 15.

[37] To appreciate the issues raised it would be in order to refer to the relevant provisions o f Pakistan Medical & Dental Council Ordinanc e, 1962. The main object of the Ordinance i s reflected in its preamble and it was, "to cons olidate the data rela ting to the registration o f medical practitioners and dentists and re-c onstitute (Medical & De ntal Council) in Pakista n in order to establish a unifor m minimum standard of ba sic and higher qualification i n medicine and dentistry".

[38] The recognized medic al qualification has been defined in Section 2 Clause (1) to mean, "any of the medical qu alifications included in the first and secon d schedule or recognized under Sections 14 & 15 of the Ordinance". The composition of th e Medical & Dental Council is sp elt out in Section 3 of the Ordinance, which reads as under:- "3.

[39] Constitution and compos ition of the Council. - (1) The Federa l Governemnt shall cause to be co nstituted a Council consisting of th e following members, namely:- one member to be elected by the National Assembly fro m amongst its members; one member from each Province, to be nominated by th e Provincial Government; one member each to be elec ted by the members of th e Syndicate of each Pakistan University from amongst th e members of the medical faculty or the dental faculty of th e University or, if the Univer sity has both a medical facult y and a dental faculty, from amongst the members of the tw o faculties; four members to be elected from amongst themselves by th e registered medical practitioners; four members to be nominated by the Federal Governmen t of whom at least one shall be a member of the Arme d Forces Medical Services; two members to be elected amongst themselves by th e registered dentists; one member to be elected by the teaching staff of eac h medical institution and dental institution in Pakistan fro m amongst the Professors on its staff, if such institution train s for a medical or dental qualification which is for the tim e being recognized under this Ordinance; one member, belonging to the legal profession, to b e nominated by the Chief Justice of Pakistan; the Director General of Healt h, Government of Pakistan.

[40] The President of the Council shall be elected by th e members of the Council from amongst themselves. No act done by the Council shall be invalid on the groun d merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect i n the constitution of, the Council". 16. The elections of members to which referenc e has been made in Se ction 3 (b) & (f) are t o be conducted by the Council in such manner as it may think fit (Secti on 4).

[41] The function an d power of the Council are provided in various se ctions of the Ordinanc e. One of the section s is Section 11 which is as follows:- "11. Recognition of medical qualificati ons granted by medical Institutions i n Pakistan.- The medical qualifications grante d by medical institutions i n Pakistan which are included in the First Schedule shall b e recognised medical qualificat ions for the purpose of thi s Ordinance.

[42] Any medical institution in Paki stan which gr ants a medica l qualification not included in the First Schedule may apply to th e Federal Government to have su ch qualification recognised, and th e Federal Government after consulting the Council, may, by notificatio n in the official Gazette, amend the Fi rst Schedule so as to include suc h qualification therein. (Emphasis is supplied).

[43] Such notification may also direct that an entry shall be made in th e last column of the First Schedule against such me dical qualificatio n declaring that it shall be recognis ed medical qualification only whe n granted after a specified date". 17. Section 13 relates to the power of the C ouncil to enter into negoti ations with appropriat e authority within or outsid e Pakistan, for settling a scheme of reciprocity for the recognitio n of Medical qualification.

[44] Se ction 14 provides that the Federa l Governemnt after consultin g the Council may accord recognition to a medical qualification gr anted by medi cal institutio n outside Pakistan. Section 15 empowers the C ouncil to certify persons to be possessed o f sufficient medical qualification of course wi th the approval of the Federal Government Section 16 provides for recognition of additional medical qualifi cation granted by foreign o r domestic medical institutions.

[45] By virtue of Section 17 the medical licenses and diploma s granted by medical institutions in or outside Pakistan are re gisterable under the Ordinance Sections 18 & 19 contemplate r ecognition of qualifications gr anted by Dental institutions i n or outside Pakistan and their certification by the Council.

[46] Section 20 empowers the Counci l to require information from every Medical or Dental institution in Pakistan as to the course s of studies and examinations being carried out. Section 21 empowers them to carry ou t inspections. Section 22 authorizes the Council to recommend withdrawal of recognition o f medical qualification to the Fe deral Government.

[47] Under Sect ion 23, the Council maintains a Register for registration of medical prac titioners possessing qualifications, which ar e recognized medical qualificat ions under the Ordinance. Section 28 prescribes a penalty fo r fraudulent representation or re gistration. Section 33 empower s the Council with previou s sanction of the Federal Government to make regulations.

[48] Section 34 mandates the Council t o furnish reports about its working to the Federal Government and Section 35 envisage s commission of inquiry by the Federal Governme nt if it is found that the Council is no t complying with any of the provisions of this Ordinance. A careful study of variou s provisions of the Ordinance re ferred to in the preceding paragr aphs show that the objectiv e of the Ordinance are as follows:- Maintenance of uniform standard of Medical & Dental education (a t the graduate and postgraduate level).

[49] Recommendations for recognition, de-recognition of medica l qualifications registration of doctors with recognized medica l qualifications within the countr y or outside the country. Registration of doctors possessing recognized medical qualificatio n from within country or from foreign countries. Making arrangements with foreign co untries for according reciproca l recognition to the medical qualifications. 18.

[50] Having had a glance at various provisions of the law under consideration and the objec t of the establishment of the Council, we take up the first two of the 5 issues framed a s mentioned above i.e. " (i) What is the nature and import of the concept of recognition o f medical qualification as cont emplated in Section 11 of the Pakistan Medical & Denta l Council Ordinance, 1962? (ii) What is the nature of ‘consultation’ with the Council by th e Federal Government, which the law requires the latter to have before passing an order unde r various provisions of the Ordinance? Although the Ordinance does not expressly use th e expression of ‘recognition’ of a training institution but a combined reading of the preamble Sections 11, 20, 21 & 22 would indicate that r ecognition accorded to a medical qualificatio n in terms of Section 11 of n ecessity would entail the rec ognition of the institution which i s imparting training and granting a me dical qualification.

[51] This is so because to assess whethe r the medical qualification being gr anted by an institution is in accord with the standard set b y the Council and to ensure "uniform standard of basic and higher quali fication in medicin e and dentistry", the Council has prescribed th e courses of study, watches the teachin g standards and has been empowered to inspect, issue directions, monitor the working of th e medical & dental institution or university which trai ns for, "grants medical or both trains an d grants a medical qualificat ion, additional qualification regi sterable medical license o r diploma or any degree, diploma a nd license in dentistry".

[52] In this regard, the law does no t contemplate any distinction between a medical institution or a chartere d university grantin g a medical degree. With regard to the power of the Council in the realm of recognition of a qualification and other related matters unde r the Ordinance this Court approved in "Shafiqu e Ahmed and others vs.

[53] Gover nment of Punjab and others (PLD 2004 SC 168 )" the view take n by the Lahore High Court in "Ahmad Abdullah & 62 others vs. Government of the Punja b and 3 others (PLD 2003 Lahore 752) ". In the latter judgment, at page 783, it was held a s follows:- "But, so far as the power to grant a Degree in some medica l qualification is concerned, no Univ ersity in Pakistan can issue a Degree in a medical qualification menti oned in the First Schedule t o Ordinance XXXII of 1962 unless the said qualification has bee n accorded prior recognition in term s of section 11(1)(2) of the sai d Ordinance which, inter alia, contemplates recognition through a notification to be issued by the Federal Governemnt after prio r consultation with Medical Council established under the sai d Ordinance.

[54] This is true of the University of Punjab, the othe r Universities similarly placed in Pakistan and University of Healt h Sciences is no exception" 19. This brings us to the sec ond issue mooted i.e. what is the nature of ‘consultation’ wit h the Council by the Federal Government, whic h the law requires the latter to have befor e passing an order under various provisions of the Ordinance? Under Section 11 (2) of th e Ordinance, it is stipulated that "any institution which grants a medical qualification which i s not included in the First Sche dule, may apply to the Fede ral Government to have suc h qualification recognized and the Federal G overnment after ‘consulting’ the Council may, b y notification in the official gazette, amend the First Schedule so as to include suc h qualification therein".

[55] The rationale appears to be that the expert opinion of the apex body o f the Medical & Dental professionals should be solicited before according recognition to a medical qualification. The ‘cons ultation’ envisaged is not the ‘consultation’ of a senior wit h the junior in administrative hier archy nor it is a ‘consultation’ with a consultant of choic e rather it is ‘consultation’ with a statutor y body mandated under the law to carry ou t prescribed functions to achieve certain objec tives.

[56] The statutory phr aseology of consultatio n has to be understood and expounded in accord and consistent with the law and to promot e the objectives given in the context. The C ouncil being a body of medical and denta l professionals, the ‘consultation’ has to be purposive and meaningful. The opinion or advic e rendered by the Council duri ng consultative process may not be binding but the Federa l Government has to consider and give it a due weight.

[57] If it chooses to disagree or bypass th e advice rendered it has to give reasons in writ ing. The reasons should reflect an objectiv e understanding of the issue and should be germane to the objectives enshrined in law Consultation with the C ouncil by the Federal Government before an order under thes e provisions is passed is reflective of the legislative intent which is twofold i.e. firstly that it i s the Federal Government which has to pass an order conferring certain legal status to a medical qualification granted by an ins titution within or outside Pakistan and secondly a n order by the Federal Government should be pr eceded by consultation wi th the Council. 20.

[58] The third & fourth issues are interrelate d and they are being dealt with together. Th e issues are as under:- "iii. Whether every chartered Uni versity having a medical faculty i s entitled to representation in the Pa kistan Medical & Dental Council i n terms of Section 3 of the Ordinance? Whether the teaching staff of each Medical & Dental Institution i n Pakistan is entitled to representation in accord with Section 3 (f) of th e Ordinance? At a first look, a pla in reading of Section 3(1)(b) gives the impression that every Pakistan i University established by a law a nd having a medical or dental faculty or both has a right o f representation.

[59] This Section does not require a university to ha ve a prior recognition of it s medical qualification (by the C ouncil) to qualify for representation. However, this has to b e read along with other provis ions of the Ordinance. A university which has a medical or a dental faculty, would make arra ngements to train, or to train and grant a degree in a medica l qualification or to extend affiliation to an institution doing this unless such a qualification i s accorded recognition in terms of Section 11 of the Ordinance, the university cannot issue a degree in the said qualification.

[60] Even otherw ise the medical and dental faculty of a university by itself would be an institution. Therefore, only those universitie s would qualif y for representation in the Council whose degr ees fall within the ambit of Section 11. Th e argument that once, a university is established, the medical qualifica tion it grants does no t require recognition in terms of the Ordinanc e would defeat the very purpose of th e Ordinance.

[61] Because educat ion being a concurrent subject under the Constitution, a universit y can be established either under Federal or Provinc ial law. If such universities are establishe d and they start imparting trai ning or granting degrees of a medical qualification independentl y of the regulatory mechanism of Pakistan Me dical & Dental Council, then each universit y would run its own courses, and there would be no institution of medical experts at nationa l level to ensure uniform quality education. 21.

[62] In case of Medical Insti tutions under Section 3 (1)(f), "the teaching staff of each medica l or dental institution in Pakistan from amongst th e Professors on its staff can elect on e member for representation in the Council, provided, "such insti tution trains for a medical o r dental qualification w hich is for the time being rec ognized under the Ordinance".

[63] Thus bot h the universities established by law in Pakistan having medi cal faculties and medica l institutions would require prio r recognition of their respective medical qualifications fo r getting representation in the Council. 22. The last fifth issue pertains to the pow ers of Pakistan Medical & Dental Council and ha s been framed as follows:- "v.

[64] Whether the Pakistan Medical & Dental Council is empowered t o ask for information, make queries , carry out inspections, issu e directions and take other steps pr escribed in law to carry out th e purposes of the Ordinance?" The powers to require information with rega rd to courses of study & examination and t o inspect examination have been conferred on the Council in terms of Sections 20 & 21.

[65] Thes e two provisions stipulate that the Council may require the ins titutions in Pakistan which trai n or grant or both train and grant a medical qualification, additional medical qualification, a diploma or a license in dentistry:- To furnish information regarding c ourses of study and examination to be undergone in order to obtain a me dical qualification in question.

[66] The minimum age at which such undergraduate courses of study can be undertaken on admission. Th e examination required to be undergone prior to such qualifica tions being conferred, any general information having relevance for obtaining the afore-referre d qualification, degree or diploma. The Council can appoint medical o r dental Inspector to insp ect the medical centers.

[67] To appoint Inspectors who are mandate d under the law not to interfere in the conduct of any examinati on but they are to report to the Executive Committee on the suffic iency of every examination which they attend and on the courses of study and facilities for teaching provided by the medical or dental institution in question at differen t stages in respect of such examination. 23.

[68] The powers envisaged under the provisions referred to in the pr eceding paragraphs are not exhaustive and they may include the anc illary powers which they may exercise to achieve the objective of the Ordinance and the regulations framed thereunder. If the Council is not satisfied on report submitted by its Ex ecutive Committee with rega rd to the courses o f studies and examinations, the law mandates tha t the Council in such an event shall repor t the matter to the Federal Government which af ter considering the report transmit the same to the concerned medical or dental ins titution asking the latter to submit explanation an d after receipt of the same and after making a ny further inquiry if it deems fit may withdraw the recognition. 24.

[69] We may observe that over the last few decades there has been a mushroom growth o f Medical and Dental institutions in the private sector. The elemen t of commercialization has been more pronounced than commitment to academic excellence. The trav ails of education in public sector are a ppalling and are partly attributable to the lopsided na tional priorities pursued by those at the helm of affairs.

[70] This tempted the pr ivate sector to fill the void. The rapid growth of educational institutions in the private sector on the one hand reflect the extent of public need/thirst for e ducation and on the oth er a deterioration or dearth of State run educational institutions. The quality of education in the pr ivate sector leaves much to be desired.

[71] Barring a few exceptions it reflects a pathetic state of affa irs. There has been a complete absence of any regulatory mecha nism in the domain of general education an d people have been allowed mostly to fleece the students and their parents. The private secto r has entered the realm of medical and dental e ducation as well.

[72] In this domain there are regulatory laws but their application needs fu rther improvement. The Pakistan Medical & Dental Council Ordinance and the regulations framed there under lay down a comprehensive procedure to ensure uniform and quality medical and dental educa tion. Similarly, the Medical & Dental Degrees Ordina nce, 1982 has restricted and regulated the right to confe r degrees, diplomas, licenses and certificates to pr actice in the medical and dental domain an d any violation thereof has penal c onsequences.

[73] There is a dire need to enforce the provisions of these laws with a view to promoting not only quality medical and dental education bu t also to provide better quality of professional services to the people. The need for regulator y mechanism in the realm of general educati on and in the domain of professional courses ha s never been greater.

[74] The Higher Education Commission has taken a number of regulator y steps to ensure qualitative improvement in the higher education. The Pakistan Medical & Dental Council through the Ordinance and the regulations framed thereunder is mandated t o pursue the objective of a unif orm standard of Medical a nd Dental education in the country All the stakeholders should strengthen these and similar institutions in the country because i t is only through these institutions that we can achieve the goals set out in their Charter. 25.

[75] A society in transition witnesses two parallel strains i.e. a proce ss of institutional erosio n and attempt by the reformers/idealists to bui ld the institutions. Effort should be to strengthe n the latter. Because institutions play a vital role in civilizi ng a people and in their onwar d march towards socio-economic a nd political progress.

[76] In the co mity of nations the credibilit y and progress of a country is measured by the strength of its instit utions. A nation which fail s to respect the institutions falls in grace, decays , splits and is condemned in history. A societ y bereft of stable institut ions would be at odds with itself.

[77] The role of institutions in societ y has been aptly commented up on by (Professor Dr. Douglass C. North in his seminal work "Institutional Change and Economic Performance"). According to him, "Institutions reduc e uncertainty by providing a structure to everyday life. They are a guide to huma n interactions, so that when we wish to greet friends on the street, drive an automobile, bu y oranges, borrow money, form a business, bury our dead, or whatever, we know (or can lear n easily) how to perform these tasks.

[78] We would readily obs erve that institutions differ if w e were to try to make the same transactions in a different country, Ban gladesh for example. I n the jargon of the economist, ins titutions define and li mit the set of c hoices of individuals Institutions include any form of constraint that human being devise to shape huma n interaction.

[79] Are inst itutions formal or informal? They c an be either: informal constrains – such as rules that human beings devise and informal constraints – such as conventions an d codes of behaviour. Institutions may be create d, as was the United States Constitution; o r they may simply evolve over time, as does the common law. ( Emphasis is supplied") . 26.

[80] In the cases in hand, we ar e seized of the affairs of a professional regulatory institution Such institutions stand on a set of rules prescr ibing the objective to be pursued, courses to b e followed and a code of ethics to be honoured . The medical graduates would deliver, woul d be worthy of their noble calling, and would be respected within and outside the country onl y if they pass through the rigorous courses of study, abide by the parameters of academi c discipline and the code of pr ofessional ethics which the Council has laid down.

[81] But abov e all, the Council itself has an onerous duty to perform a nd a responsibility to shoulder. Th e institution would be made or marr ed partly by what it does to itself, to its mandate, to th e oath of its calling and to the law of which it is a creature. 27. For what has been discussed above , Civil Appeal Nos. 2206 of 2005, 721 of 2006 Criminal Appeal No.304 of 2003, Civil Petitio n No.459 of 2006 after conversion into appea l & Suo Moto Case No.8 of 2006, are allowed , the impugned judgments are set aside and w e are inclined to hold, decl are and direct as under:- No medical institution or university can train or grant a medical o r dental qualification or train and grant both unless the sai d qualification, degree or diploma has been accorded recognition in terms of Section 11 of the Paki stan Medical & Dental Council Ordinance, 1962.

[82] The Federal Government before according recognition in terms o f Section 11 has to have a meaningf ul and purposive ‘consultation’ with the Pakistan Medical & Dental Counc il and the order to be passed in this regard has to be germane to th e purposes and objects of the law. Every University established by la w in Pakistan having a medical o r dental faculty or both and ev ery Medical & Dental Institution performing a similar function have a right of representation in terms of Section 3(1) (b) & (f) of the Ordinance, prov ided the medical qualification or diploma for which they are training the students in their university/institution have been accorded recognition as prescribed under Section 11 of the Ordinance.

[83] There is no concept of provis ional recognition of a medical qualification issued by a medical institution either under the Pakistan Medical & Dental Council Ordina nce or the Regulations frame d thereunder. Since on account of the act of Pakistan Medical & Dental Council and the Federal Governme nt certain medical qualification / degree / diploma being issued by certain medical institutions have been granted provisional recognition and on account of this, several students admitted in those institutions an d they may be at various stages of their professional c ourses, we are not inclined to direc t immediate closure of these institutions.

[84] The cases of these colleges / institutions having provisional recognition shall be taken up by the Council. The institutions are given six months time from the announcement of this judgment to make up the deficiencies and subm it a detailed report to the Pakistan Medical & Dental Council a nd thereafter the Council having examined the reports and carrying out requisite inspections, if deeme d necessary, shall submit its recommendations to the Federal Government which shall decide the matter by 14th August 2007.

[85] The medical institutions whose case s do not qualify for recognition in terms of Section 11 of the Ordina nce and no order qua recognition o f their medical qualification is pa ssed by the Federal Government, by the afore-referred date shall not be allowed to function thereafter. The students studying in the instituti ons / colleges who were accorde d provisional recognition and whose cases are not approved in terms o f Section 11 of the Ordinance, shall be accommodated by the Federal Government in various medical institutions of their respective provinces of residence.

[86] Necessary steps shall be taken by the Federal Government so that the students are not put unde r any mental pressure and their studies do not suffer on account of this exercise. This is being done firstly, because the Pakis tan Medical & De ntal Council & the Federal Government have been partly responsible for thei r admissions when it granted provis ional recognition and secondly, on Court query the Secretary, Pa kistan Medical & Dental Council undertakes that the Council with the assistance of the Federal Government shall ensure that th ese students are accommodated in Medical & Dental Institutions of their respective Provinces.

[87] The Council shall ensure that all necessary steps are taken for the composition of the Council in acc ord with the afore-referre d provisions under Section 4 of the Pakistan Medical & Dental Council Ordinance. It is the Council which has to conduct elections in terms o f clauses (b) (c) (e) or (f) of Sub- section 1 of Section 3 and a meeting o f the Council shall be held within si x weeks of the pronouncement o f the judgment.

[88] The Federal Ministry of Health, Gove rnment of Pakistan is directed to ensure that the mandate of the Pakistan Medical & Dental Council Ordinance, 1962 & Medical & De ntal Degrees Ordinance, 1982 is given effect to in letter and spirit and any viola tion of these laws are met with penal consequences as envisaged under the law.

[89] In view of our findings in para 22 above with regard to powers of the Council qua inspection of a Medic al Institution, the proceedings o f contempt against the appellants are uncalled for. Therefore, Criminal Appeal No.304 of 2003 is allowed and the proceedings before theHigh Court, Rawalpindi Be nch are set aside.

[90] In view of terms noted above, all these ap peals & petitions are disposed off. JUDGE JUDGE JUDGE JUDGE ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 15.12.2006 "APPROVED FOR REPORTING" ISLAMABAD, THE 15.12.2006 M. Zubair /*