Case No: C.A.457/2010
Case Title: M/s. Dewan Khalid Textile Mills Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax (LTU)
Subject: Tax/Custom Duty
Judge: MR. JUSTICE MUNIB AKHTAR
Judgment Date: 07-12-2018
Upload Date: 14-12-2018
Citations: 2019 SCMR 158
SC Citations: 2018 SCP 134
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/C.A._457_2010.pdf

[1] order dated 9.3.2010 passed by the High Court o f Sindh, Karachi in ITC Nos.200 & 201 of 2003 ) Dewan Khalid Textile Mills Ltd. (in both cases) … Appellant (s) Vs Commissioner of Income Tax (Legal Division, ) Large Taxpayers Unit, Karachi. (in both cases) …Respondent (s) For the Appellant (s) (in both cases) : Mr.

[2] Salman Pasha, ASC . Mr. K.A. Wahab, AOR (Absent) . For the Respondent (s) : Dr. Farhat Zafar, ASC. Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR. Mr. Abdul Hameed, Secretary Legal, FBR. Date of hearing : 07.12.2018 ORDER Munib Akhtar , J.-These two appeals , relating to the same assessee , arise out of the Income Tax Ordinance, 1979 (“1979 Ordinance”) .

[3] The appellant succeeded before the learned Appellate Tribunal , but that decision was reversed by the learned High Court by the impugned j udgment , on tax references filed by the Department. Leave was granted vide order dated 01.07.2010 to consider whether, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there was any “definite information” within the meaning of s. 65 of the 1979 Ordinance to war rant proceedings in terms thereof.

[4] We may note that the impugned judgment is reported as Commissioner of Income Tax v. Dewan Khalid Textile Mills Ltd. 2010 PTD 1397 . C.As.No.457 &  2 2. Briefly stated the facts are that the appellant filed its return for the relevant assessment year but thereafter (before the assessment was framed ) filed a revised return .

[5] The reason for th e revised return was that the appellant claimed that in respect of certain amounts accruing to it, it was liable to be taxed in terms of s. 80B of the 1979 Ordinance. That section applied , as provided in its subsection (1), to “an individual , unregistered firm, association of person s, Hindu undivided family or artificial juridical person referred to in clause (32) of s.2”.

[6] The section went on to provide th at the amounts referred to in subsection (2) were to be treated as a separat e block of income, on the whole of which tax was payable at the special rates set out in the First Schedule. One category given in subsection (2) (in clause (b) thereof) was “inter est or profit on which the tax is deductible under sub -section (2-A) of section 50”.

[7] The appellant claimed that during the relevant income year amounts falling in this category had accru ed to it and were therefore liable to tax in terms of s. 80B. In the assessment framed by order dated 28.12.1995 the Income Tax Officer accepted this contention , and the said amounts were taxed accordingly .

[8] However, subsequently , by notice dated 10. 06.1998 issued under s. 65, the ITO sought to reopen the assessment on the gr ound that the appellant was not so entitled. A revised assessment order , adverse to the appellant , was made on 25. 06.1998 . The appellant ’s appeal against the same failed before the CIT (Appeals).

[9] The appellant took the matter further before the learned Appellate Tribunal w here, by order dated 06.03.2002 , its appeal was allowed. As presently relevant, t he ground throughout taken by the appellant was that action under s. 65 could only be taken if there existed any “definite information” for reopening the asse ssment , and that no such information existed in the facts and circumstances of the case.

[10] This plea was accepted by the le arned Appellate Tribunal. H owever, the Department took the matter further in tax referenc es and the learned High Court , by means of the impugned judgment , found against the appellant. This le d to the filing of the appeals in this Court. 3. Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the learned High Court had erred in rejecting the appellant’s plea that no definite information exist ed in the facts and circumstances of the case.

[11] Learned counsel submitted that the learned High Court had relied on a judgment of this Court reported as Genert ech Pakistan Ltd. and others vs. Income Tax Appellate Tribunal of Pakistan and others 2004 SCMR 13 19 (“Genertech ”) in which certain observations have been made with regard to s. 80B. Learned counsel submitted that while j udgment s of the Superior Courts could constitute definite information , in the present case the judgment relied upon was C.As.No.457 &  3 rendered many years after the initiation of proceedings under s. 65 .

[12] The Genertech judgment could not therefore constitute definite information in the facts and circumstances of the present case. Learned counsel submitted that it was also well settled that if the ITO o r even the Central Board of Revenue (as it then was) subsequently took a different view of the relevant statutory provisions, that was merely a change of opinion and did not constitute “definite information” within the meaning of law.

[13] Referring to the orde r made under s. 65, learned counsel submitted that that was all that happened in the present case. The ITO took one view as regard s the applicability of s. 80B when the assessment was originally framed , but thereafter appear to have changed his mined as to its correct interpretation when making the order under s. 65.

[14] This was a mere change of opinion , which was irrelevant and impermissible for purpose s of s. 65. Learned counsel submitted that the learned High Court had reached the wrong conclusion and praye d that the appeals be allowed. 4. Learned counsel for the Department , ably assisted by the learned Secretary Legal FBR, defended the impugned judgment .

[15] It was submitted that the proper meaning of “definite information” had recently been considered by this Court in Commissioner Inland Revenue Zone -I vs. Khan CNG filling Station and others 2017 SCMR 1414 . Although this judgment was rendered in relation to the Income Tax Ordinance, 2001, learned submitted that it applied equally to the expression as used in s. 65 of the 1979 Ordinance.

[16] Learned counsel submitted that the facts and circumstances at ha nd disclosed “definite information” , and the action taken by the ITO, ultimately upheld by the learned High Court, was correct and unexceptionable. It was prayed th at the appeals be dismissed. 5. After having considered the matter, the case law cited and the record we concluded , with respect, that the impugned judgment could not be sustained and therefore allowed the appeals by mean s of a short order announced in C ourt.

[17] It is now well settled th at the judgment of a Superior Court can, in appropriate circumstances , constitute “definite information” in relation to the fact s of the relevant case. It is also well settled that a mere change of opinion by the tax authori ties does not constitute definite information . In particular , if the concerned authority such as an ITO, acting on his own or under instructions from superior officers , subsequently comes to a different conclusion w ith regard to the proper applicability or interpretation of a statutory provision that is a mere change of opinion .

[18] Reference in this regard be may made to EFU General Insurance Company vs. Federation of Pakistan and o thers PLD 1997 SC 700 where, referring to Central C.As.No.457 &  4 Insurance Co. vs. Central Boa rd of Revenue 1993 SCMR 1232 , it was held as follows (pp. 719 -20; emphasis supplied ): “10. … It was observed that the words “definite information” are the keywords for the purposes of justifying action under subsection (1) and, as the said words had not be en defined in the Ordinance , they will carry their literary meanings.

[19] It was observed that every information cannot be treated as the basis for reopening of the assessment but the information should be of the nature which should qualify as “definite inform ation” and that the expression “definite information” could not be given a universal meaning but it will have to be construed in each case.

[20] It was further observed that where an assessee discloses all the material facts without any concealment and the asse ssment had been consciously completed by the Income Tax Officer, in such a case, in the absence of the discovery of any new fa cts which can be treated as “definite information”, there cannot be any scope for reopening of the assessment under section 65.

[21] It was further observed that any change of opinion on the basis of the same material by the Income Tax Officer will not warrant pressing into service the said provision. It was observed th at a Circular from the Board of Revenue interpreting any provision of a law was not a “definite information” for reopening of assessment by an Income Tax Officer.

[22] It w as then observed that expression “definite information” will inclu de factual information as well as information about the existence of a binding judgment of a competent Court of law/forum for the purposes of section 65 of the Ordinance, but any interpretation of a provision of law by a functionary which has not been entrusted with the function to interpret such provision judicially cannot be tre ated as a “defini te information” .

[23] An interpretation by a functionary of the Revenue Department or a change in the interpretation of any provision by any functionary of the department including the Central Board of Revenue is not “definite information” for being made a law ful basis for reopening an assessment already made”. 6. In the present case the learned High Court correctly noted (in para 8) that “the main controversy in the present case is that whether definite information was available with the AO to reopen an alrea dy completed assessment or not”.

[24] However, with respect, the learned High Court th en erroneously proce eded to rely on Genertech , without appreciating that that judgment was rendered many years after the initiation of action under s. 65 in the case at hand . Since the judgment did not exist at the relevant time it could not ipso facto constitute “definite information” in the facts and circumstances of the present case.

[25] Therefore, with respect, the reliance placed there on was misconceived and misplaced. In our view it is only a judgment of a Superior Court as available at the relevant time that can constitute “definite information” . We may also note that t he reference to “forum” in the passages cited above can , in the hierarchy of authorities /remedies under inco me tax legislation , mean only the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (now the Appellate Tribunal Inland Revenue ). (The reference may possibly also include a decision of the Appellate C.As.No.457 &  5 Tribunal set up for purposes of other fiscal legislation, but this is a point that we leave open to be consider ed in some appropriate future case. ) Be that as it may , no such judgment existed when proceedings were initiated under s. 65 and hence there was no “definite information ” within the meaning of law that would have made it permissible for the ITO to reopen the assessment.

[26] In our view , the learned Appellate Tribunal was correct in its decision and, with respect, the learned High Court erred materially in coming to a different conclusion. The reference by learned counsel for the Department to the recent judgment of this Court noted above (from which a passage was read out) is, with respect, not apposite since the facts and circumstances in the cited case were materially different from those at hand. 7.

[27] While the foregoing is dis positive of the appeals, there is one further point that should be adverted to , and that is as regards the observation s made in Genertech in relation to s. 80B . The relevant passage (which is reproduced in the im pugned judgment ) is as follows: “13. In this behalf it may be noted that under section 80 -B such concession is not available to Public Limited Companies as its subsection (1) in categorical terms has extended its benefits to an individual, unregistered firm, association of person, Hindu undivided family or artificial juridical person, therefore , the contention of learned c ounsel is accordingl y repelled .” 8.

[28] The actual statutory language used in s.80B , with reference to the assesse es to whom the said provision was applicable , has already been reproduced herein above. Five categories of assessees came within the scope of the section , of wh ich the last was “artificial juridical persons r eferred to in clause (32) of s. 2”.

[29] Clearly, i n order to properly appreciate the scope of this category it was necessary to refer back to s. 2(32). This was in fact the definition of the term “person” . As presently relevant , it provide d that “a company, a local authority and every other artificial juridical person” was included in the definition.

[30] The term “ company ” was itself define d in clause (16) of s. 2 and, as was to be expected , a company registered under companies ’ legislation f ound express mention therein. It therefore seems to us , prima facie, that when all the relevant statutory provisions are taken into accoun t a company did come within the scope of s. 80B .

[31] It appears that the specific clauses of s. 2 just referred to were not brought to the attention of the Court in Genertech and thus all of the material statutory provision s were not taken into account . To the extent that s. 80B was considered therein it therefore appears to us , with respect , that the observation s made in Gene rtech may be open to doubt.

[32] However, we need not C.As.No.457 &  6 take this point any further he re as the appeals can be, and have been , disposed of f on another basis. The aspect just mentioned is therefore left open to be considered in such appropriate case , if any, as may arise in the future. 9. For the foregoing reasons the appeals were allowed , with the result that the impugned judgment was set aside a nd the decision of the learned Appellate Tribunal stood restore d.