Case No: C.A.243/2011
Case Title: Commissioner Inland Revenue, RTO, Peshawar v. M/s Pakistan Tobacco Company (Ltd), Islamabad & another
Subject: Tax/Sales Tax Act
Judge: Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar
Judgment Date: 31-05-2022
Upload Date: 15-06-2022
Citations: 2022 SCMR 1251
SC Citations: 2022 SCP 192
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.a._243_2011.pdf

[1] order dated 23.12.2010 and 05.10.2017 passed by the Peshawar High Court, Peshawar in Custom Reference No. with C.M.No. and  and Sales Tax Reference No.68 -P/2007 .) Commissioner Inland Revenue, Peshawar … Appellant (in both cases) vs M/s Pakistan Tobacco Company (Ltd.), 1st Floor, Evacue Trust Complex, F -, Islamabad and another : (in CA ) Khurshid Ali, Pepsi Cola Dealer, Margazar Road, Saidu Sharif, Swat : (in CA  ) … Respondents For the Appellant : Dr.

[2] Farhat Zafar, ASC Mr. Bahadur Sher Afridi, Additional Commissioner, FBR, Peshawar (in both cases) For Respondent No.1 : Mr. Farrukh Jawad Panni, ASC Mr. Ahmed Nawaz Ch. AOR (in CA  ) Mr. Masoor ur Rehman, ASC Sh. Mahmood Ahmed, AOR (in CA  ) Date of Hearing : 31.05.2022 ORDER Munib Akhtar, J. : There are before us two appeals which arise out of the Sales Tax Act, 199 0 (“Act”).

[3] Although the appeals were disposed of by different judgments (of the same learned H igh Court ), the issues involved are the same. Indeed , leave to appeal CA  and CA  2 was granted in CA  on the basis that leave had earlier been granted in CA  . The cases were therefore clubbed for hearing . Before us , the appellant -department was represe nted by learned counsel , ably assisted by the Additional Commissioner FBR, Peshawar , who with the permission of the Co urt also made submissions before us. 2.

[4] In CA  the respondent -taxpayer is a well -known manufacturer and seller of cigarettes. On o r about 17.08.2000 it was served with a show cause notice in relation to the tax period s July, 1999 to May, 2000 . It was alleged that the respondent had supplied its goods to various unregistered dealers , all of whom did business in the erstwhile PATA/FATA (herein after “the Tribal Areas”) .

[5] It was alleged that on such supplies the respondent was required to charge additional sales tax in terms of s. 3(1A) of the Act but had failed to do so. A demand was sought to be raised accordingly . The notice was resist ed by the respondent on the ground (as now relevant) that the Act ha ving not been extended to the erstwhile Tribal Areas in terms of Article 247 of the Constitution, i t had no obligation to charge additional sales tax , or any liability on failure to do so .

[6] An order -in-original was made against the respondent and its appeal to the Collector (Appeals) failed. However, when the matter was taken up by the Appellate Tribunal by way of further appeal , the respondent met with success and the demand was set aside. The department filed a tax reference in the learned High Court , which was dismissed by means of the impugned judgment dated 23.12.2010 .

[7] Leave to appeal was sought , which was granted vide order dated 24.03.2011 in the following terms: “Learned counsel inter-alia has contended that the department intends to effect recovery of sales tax in the area where Sales Tax Act, 1990 is applicable, therefore, the plea of the respondent that in FATA and PATA, section 3(1 -A) of Sales Tax Act 1990 and the subsequent enact ment has not been extended in terms of Article 247 of the Constitution is not relevant.” 3.

[8] In CA  the facts are that the respondent was a dealer of a well-know n brand of soft drink in the erstwhile Tribal Areas. On or about 18.02.2003 it was ser ved with a show cause notice that, being unregistered, it was liable to pay additional sales CA  and CA  3 tax under s. 3(1A) for the tax period s March, 2000 to September, 2001 but had not done so.

[9] This demand was resisted, inter alia , on the same ground as noted above. An order -in-original was made against the respondent . Its appeal before the Collector (Appeals) succeeded . In this case it was therefore the department that took the matter before the Appellate Tribunal , which dismissed its appeal.

[10] The department took the matter further by way of tax reference before the learned High Court which dismissed the same by means of the impugned judgment dated 05.10.2017. The department brought the matter before this Court and at the leave stage reliance was placed on the leave g ranting order made in the other appeal.

[11] Leave was granted accordingly and , as noted above , the matters were clubbed for hearing and disposal. We have heard learned counsel for the department and also the Additional Commissioner, FBR and have had the advant age of their able submissions in their challenge to the impugned judgments . Learned counsel for the respondents have , on the other hand, supported the decisions.

[12] At the conclusion of the hearing we were of the view that the appeals ought to be dismissed fo r reason s to be recorded later , which are set out below. 4. Although the two appeals approach the question from opposite angles, the point in issue is the same , i.e., whether for the tax periods involved t here was any liability for the payment of addition al tax in terms of s. 3(1A) in respect of a situation where the person making the taxable supplies was located in Pakistan whereas the recipient of those supplies was located in the erstwhile Tribal Areas.

[13] It is to be noted that we use the words “in Pakist an” in a special sense, which is how they were understood and app lied before the 25th Amendment (2018), by which the erstwhile Tribal Areas cease d to exist and stood absorbed in the Provinces of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (which is presently relevant) and Balochis tan.

[14] That special sense was that, inter alia , federal laws which otherwise appl ied in the whole of Pakistan nonetheless did not so apply in relation to the Tribal Areas by reason of Art. 247 of the Constitution (since omitted). For a law to ap ply in the Tr ibal Areas, there had to be a specific direction in th at regard in terms of Article 247(3), and admittedly there was no such direction in relation to the Act at the relevant time.

[15] Learned counsel for the CA  and CA  4 department and the Additional Commissioner placed st rong reliance on the fact that in CA  , the supplie r of the taxable goods was admittedly in Pakistan , and in CA  could safely be assumed to be so. Reliance was placed on s. 3(3)(a) of the Act . On such basis it was contended that the fact th at the recipients of the supplies were in the Tribal Areas was not relevant, and Article 247 had no application.

[16] The supplies were taxable supplies within the meaning of the Act and, inasmuch as the recipients were not registered thereunder, additional tax was attracted in terms of s. 3(1A). With respect, we were unable to agree . We may note that the relevant provisions of the Act as considered below, including s. 3(1A), have undergone several changes and amendments over time.

[17] We are of course concerned with the provisions as they stood during the tax periods involved. The statutory language set out below is as applicable at the relevant time. 5. Subsection (1A) of s. 3 sought to impose a tax in addition to the one , inter alia, levied in terms of subsection (1) on “taxable supplies … made in Pakistan to a person other than a registered person …”.

[18] The language of the charge require d consider ation of the relevant definitions as given in s. 2 of the Act. Clause (41) there of defined “taxable supplies” as meaning “a supply of taxable goods made in Pakistan… ”. Clause (39) define d “taxable goods” in terms that include d the goods in volved in the present appeal s.

[19] This le ft for consideration the definition of “supply” at the relevant time . Clause (33) define d “supplies” as including “sale, lease … or other disposition of goods carried out for consideration …”. For present purposes the effect of these definit ions can be summed up as follow s. For there to have been a valid levy and charge in terms of s. 3(1A), there had to have been a sale of taxable goods in Pakistan .

[20] The sale of goods is of course a transaction well -known to the law and is , in general term s, governed by the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 (“1930 Act”) . That Act provides (see s. 4) that where property in the goods is transferred from the seller to the buyer the contract is called a “sale” but where a transfer of the property in the goods is to take place at a future time o r subject to some condition thereafter to be fulfilled , the contract is to be called an “agreem ent to sell ”.

[21] Section 19 of the 1930 Act provides, inter alia , CA  and CA  5 that unless a different intention is shown, ss. 20 to 24 set out the rules that are to apply for ascertaining the intention of the parties as to the time when the property in the goods is to pa ss to the buyer. Now , there can be no doubt that in relation to any transaction of the sale of goods , in determining whether sales tax is to be levied, charged and recovered in terms of the Act, the provisions of the 1930 Act will apply subject to what is stated in the former statute, either expressly or by way of necessary implication.

[22] Thus, the term “sale” as used in the definition of “supply” in clause (33) of s. 2 the Act can include both a ‘sale’ and an ‘agreement to sell ’ in terms of the 1930 Act . One reason for this is that the Act , in clause (44) of s. 2, also contain s a definition of “time of supply”. At the relevant time, this definition provide d as follows: “a supply made in Pakistan shall be deemed to have taken place at the earlier of the time o f delivery of goods or the time when any payment is received by the supplier in respect of that supply…” .

[23] Learned counsel for the department , as also the Additional Commissioner , place d reliance on this definition as well. It is to be noted that this defin ition also contained the words “in Pakistan”. Thus, on any view of the matter the sale between the respondent and its dealer s in CA  and between the respondent and its principal in CA  had to take place “in Pakistan”, in the special sense in which these words were used prior to the 25th Amendment.

[24] In our view, the question as to whether the supplies over the relevant tax periods were indeed made “in Pakistan” was essentially one of fact, or at least ha d significant factual elements . Quite o bviously those factual aspects had to be properly alleged in any show notice issued by the department , and proved or otherwise established from the record.

[25] However, when the show cause notices in both the appeals are examined there is no such allegation , and when the record is examined there are no relevant factual findings as could result in a conclusion that the supplies over the relevant tax periods were indeed made “in Pakistan”. Learned counsel for the appellant as also the Additional Commissioner soug ht to rely , insofar as the factual aspect of the cases were concern ed, only on the fact (which was admitted in CA  and was sought to be impliedly established in CA  ) that the supplier was “in Pakistan”.

[26] However, in our view this was not en ough. The reason is that the CA  and CA  6 Act taxes supplies as defined . It is certainly true that in terms of s. 3(3)(a) the legal liability to pay the tax falls on the person making the taxable supplies. However , the crucial question in the present cases was whether or not the supplies were made “in Pakistan” .

[27] That question was not, as a matter of fact , established from the record and was not even alleged in the show cause notices. This defect was , in our view , fatal to the case sought to be made out by the department , and in the absence of any such findings the show cause notices simply could not succeed.

[28] We may note that the learned High Court in both the impugned judgments as well as the learned Appellate Tribunal proceeded to reach the conclusion that the departmen t had no case on a line of reasoning which was rather d ifferent from the one that finds favour with us. We say nothing as to the correctness or otherwise of the views that were expressed by the forums below.

[29] However, we are satisfied that on a correct read ing of the Act as it stood at the relevant time in relation to the tax periods involved , and in the facts and the circumstances of the two cases before us, the respondents were rightly entitled to the relief they were granted. That relief is affirmed by us . 6.

[30] For the foregoing reasons, these appeals stood dismissed at the conclusion of the hearing. Judge Judge Judge Islamabad, the 31st May, 2022 Naveed/* Approved for reporting