Case No: C.A.1256/2008
Case Title: Allah Ditta v. Ali Muhammad
Subject: Pre-emption Cases
Judge: MR. JUSTICE QAZI FAEZ ISA
Judgment Date: 18-11-2015
Upload Date: 12-01-2016
Citations: PLD 2016 SC 73
SC Citations: 2016 SCP 11
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/C.A._1256_2008.pdf

[1] judgment dated 4.7.2008 in C.R. No. passed by the Lahore High Court Laho re) Allah Ditta …. Appellant VERSUS Ali Muhammad …. Respondent For the Appellant : Mr. Younas Khan Naul, ASC For the Respondent : Mr. Ahmed Bakhsh Bharwana, ASC Mr. Nazir Ahmed B hutta, ASC Date of Hearing : 5th November 2015 JUDG MENT QAZI FAEZ ISA, J.

[2] This appeal has been preferred against the judgment dated 4th July 2008 of a learned Single Judge of the Lahore High Court, Lahore, who accepted the civil revision petition and set - aside the judgment and decree of the learned Addit ional District Judge dated 15th February 2003 and restored the judgment dated 11th September 2002 of the learned Civil Judge who had decreed the pre - emption suit filed by the respondent. 2.

[3] Mr. Younas Khan Naul, the learned counsel for the appellant , stated that the appellate court had rightly set aside the judgment of the trial court as the respondent (plaintiff in the suit) had failed to establish his right as co-owner or shafi sharik , in terms of the explanation to section 6 of the Punjab Pre -emption Ac t, 1991 (“ the CA  2 Act”) as he did not own any property in Khata No. 170 wherein was situated the sold property, i.e. 21 kanal and 12 marla situated in Khata No. 170, M urabba No.47, Qilla No. 12 -9- , Mauza Wahga Kalika, Tehsil and District Jhang (“ the said p roperty ”).

[4] The learned counsel next contended that t he respondent had also failed to establish his alleged right as a participator in the “special rights attached to the immovable property ” or shafi kha lit as per the explanation in section 6 of the Act sin ce the Jhang -Sargodha Road, which was contiguous to the land of the respondent and the said property , could not be categorized as a “right of passage ” to the respondent’s land nor could the respondent establish that the said property shared the “ right of p assage of water or right of irrigation ” with the respondent’s land .

[5] As regards the alleged entitlement as shafi j ar only a corner of the respondent’s land touched a corner of the said property, therefore, the respondent’s land could not be categorized as being “ adjacent to the immovable property being sold ” as per the explanation in section 6 of the Act . Therefore, the appellate court ha d rightly set -aside the finding s of the trial court , which were clearly contrary to the facts and the evidence.

[6] Regarding the determination by the trial court of the sale price as being one hundred and fifty thousand rupees the learned counsel stated that such finding was arrived at without any evidence and contradicted the price of one hundred and ninety thousand rupees stipulated in the sale mutation . The learned counsel contended that the judgment of the appellate court was well reasoned whereas that of the trial c ourt, which was maintained by the High Court, was conjectural and contrary to the established principles of pr e-emption laws.

[7] It was lastly contended that the informant Faqir Muhammad (PW -2) did not mention the time of making the immediate demand or talb-i-muwathibat . CA  3 3. On the other hand the learned counsel for the respondent relied upon the ju dgments of the tr ial court and of the High Court ; he stated that the respondent had established his rights as shafi s harik , shafi khalit and shafi j ar.

[8] With regard to the sale price the learned counsel stated that one hundred and ninety thousand rupees shown in the sale m utation was false and had been exaggerated to forestall the respondent to exercise his right to pre -empt the said sale. 4. We heard the learned counsel at length and with their assistance examined the documents on record.

[9] We enquired from the learned counse l whether any of the exhibited document s establish the respondent ’s right of pre -emption as shafi s harik and / or shafi jar , since the judgment of the trial court and also of the High Court was silent in this regard , whilst the appellate court had determin ed, that: “The plaintiff has presented copy of Jamabandi Ex.P.5 in support of his contention which negates his version.

[10] He was owner in Khatas No.  while the disputed land is situated in Khata No. 170, therefore, his contention that he was co -owner in the Khata is not correct.” The learned counsel responded by referr ing to the statement of the Patwari (PW-1) and the map produced by him , as under : "ﺑﺮ ﺣﻠﻒ ﺎن６ﺑ ﺎ６ﮐ ﮐﻪ ﻧﻘﻞ ﻋﮑﺲ ﺷﺠﺮہ EX.P -1 ﺑﻤﻄﺎﺑﻖ ﮑﺎرڈ５ر درﺳﺖ Ｂ ﺟﻮ ﺮا６ﻣ ﻗﻠﻤﯽ دﺳﺘﺨﻄﯽ ۔Ｂ ﮑﺎرڈ５ر ﻣﺘﻌﻠﻘﻪ ﻫﻤﺮاہ ﺎ５ﻻ ﻫﻮں ﺑﻐﺮض ﻣﻼﺣﻈﻪ ﺶ６ﭘ ﮐﺮﺗﺎ ﻫﻮں" However, the aforesaid exhibit (EX.P-1) merely shows that a corner of the said property touches a corner of the r espondent’s land , and nothing further.

[11] The learned counsel for the respondent could not refer to any document to show that the respondent was a co -owner or co-sharer in the corpus of the undivided immovable property wherefrom the said property had been sol d. The High Court too did not delve into this matter, but still proceeded to set aside the CA  4 determination of the same by the appellate court, by simply stating that, “ Aks Shajra on record clearly mentions that the land of the petitioner is adjacent to the d isputed land ”; whether the two lands were adjacent or not would be relevant for the determination of the respondent ’s right as shafi jar but not to ascertain whether the respondent was a shafi sharik .

[12] Therefore, the finding of the appellate court that the respondent was not a shafi sharik was unexceptionable. 5. We next consider the respondent’s purported capacity as shafi jar. In this regard the respondent had also placed reliance on the aforesaid e xhibit (EX.P-1) however a n examination of this document reveals that the western corner of the said property merely touched the southern corner of the respondent’s land .

[13] This in our opinion would not meet the requirement of the two properties being “ adjacent ” to each other in terms of the explanation to sectio n 6 of the Act . With regard to this very aspect there is a precedent of the Lahore High Court (that had escaped the notice of the learned judge as well as the learned counsel appearing before the High Court) which was the case of Muhammad Ayub v.

[14] Hazrat M ansha (2006 MLD 1001) wherein Jawwad S. Khawaja, J (as he then was) had held: “The entire concept of contiguity in matters of pre-emption is based upon the premise that the owner of land sharing a common boundary with land, which is subject -matter of a pre -emption suit, should have a right superior to that of a purchaser who does not own land having a common boundary with the suit-land.

[15] In the present case it is quite evident that the suit -land has no common boundary with the land owned by the respondent/pl aintiff in Square No.88. The mere fact that Killa No. 25 in Square No.88 has one corner touching the corner of Killa No.1 in Square No.102, which is part of the suit-land, does not result in any shared boundaries between the two and, as such, cannot be tr eated as being contiguous.

[16] It, therefore, follows that the ownership of the respondent/plaintiff in Killa No.25 of Square No.88 does not vest in him a superior right of pre-emption in respect of the suit -land.” CA  5 6. We now proceed to consider whether the respondent could be categorized as shafi khal it. The main Jhang -Sargodha Road which can be accessed by both the lands cannot be categorized as a “right of passage ”.

[17] The respondent had also failed to establish that there was “right of water or right of ir rigation ” running through the said property bring ing water to the respondent ’s land, therefore , the respondent had also failed to establish his right as shafi k halit. The plaintiff had stated that his tube -well supplied water to the said property whereas his witness Faqir M uhammad (PW -2) had contradicted him by stating that the said property was irrigated from the tube -well of Shaiq Hassan (DW -2). 7.

[18] The appellate c ourt had also correctly overturned the finding of the trial court with regard to the sale price . Both th e seller of the la nd (Shaiq Hasan , DW-2) and the purchaser (appellant , DW-1) had testified that the price respectively re ceived and paid was Rs.190,000 and such price was also mentioned in the sale mutation , therefore, in the absence of any cogent evidence it was not correct to for the learned trial judge to conclude that the price for sale was Rs.150,000 simply on the basis of some minor contradiction s in the testimony of the said witnesses.

[19] It is also noteworthy that the respondent in his examination -in-chief made no mention of the sale price whereas in his cross -examination simply stated that it was approximately Rs.150,000, but without providing the basis for his information. The informant of the sale, the said Faqir Muhammad however made no mention of the sale price.

[20] The plaintiff and his witness had to first testify that the sale price was other than the one that had been shown and then the basis thereof. It is often seen that a statement with regard to sale price is made by the pre -empt or without any basis whatsoever simply to CA  6 obtain an advantage. In this regard in the case of Subhanuddin v.

[21] Pir Ghulam (PLD 2015 Supreme Court 69) we had held that : “Therefore, when an undue advantage is sought to be gained on the basis of a completely un substantiated statement it would disentitle a shafee to claim pre - emption. This was not a case where the plaintiff had been unable to establish the price that he contended was paid for the said land, but instead a case where a plea which had no basis in f act was taken to gain an advantage.” (at page 77J) 8.

[22] In the circumstances there was no occasion for the High Court to invoke its revisional jurisdiction under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure as there was no illegality or material irregularity or for that matter any other defect in the judgment of the appellate court requiring correct ion. We, therefore, allow this appeal and set -aside the impugned judgment of the High Court and restore the judgment of the appellate court .

[23] Consequently the pre-emption suit filed by the respondent is dismissed. In view of the facts of the case, t he appellant will be entitled to costs throughout. Judge Judge Announced in open court On 18th November 2015 By Justice Qazi Faez Isa, J. At Islamabad APPROVED FOR REPORTING (Zulfiqar)