Case No: C.A.1121/2018
Case Title: Ijaz-ul-Haq v. Mrs. Maroof Begum Ahmed & others
Subject: Suit for specific performance
Judge: Mr. Justice Shahid Waheed
Judgment Date: 16-08-2023
Upload Date: 05-09-2023
Citations: PLD 2023 SC 653
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 269
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.a._1121_2018.pdf

[1] judgment dated 11.07.2018 passed by th e Islamabad High Court, Islamabad in R.F.A. No.138 of 20 14) Ijaz ul Haq … Appellant VERSUS Mrs. Maroof Begum Ahmed & others … Respondent s For the Appellant : Ch. Mushtaq Hussain , ASC Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR For Respondent No.1 : Ex-Parte For Respondent No.2 : Mr.

[2] Niazullah Khan Niazi, ASC For Respondent No.3 : Ch. Riasat Ali Gondal, ASC Ghulam Qadir, Asst. CDA Date of Hearing : 16.08.2023 JUDGMENT Shahid Waheed , J. The variant decree drawn b y the Islamabad High Court has impelled the plaintiff to appeal before us to restore the decree issued to him by the trial Court in his suit for specific performance of the contract . 2.

[3] It will conduce to analytical clarity of the questions to be determi ned by us , if we relate the facts giving rise to them, and to do so, we deem it appropriate to make it clear that we will refer to the parties by their array in the trial Court, and secondly, since this appeal excites two questions, one of which does not o rdinarily arise, while the Civil Appeal No.1121 of 20 18 2 other is a standard feature of such suits and the answer to it helps to determine the entitlement of the plaintiff to get a decree in his favour , we will bifurcate the facts into two sets, as to find out a clear and a definite an swer to the questions. 3.

[4] The first question , to be decided by us, will automatically come to the fore on stating the relevant facts, which are not in dispute, so without further ado, we proceed to the facts . The plaintiff, who is appellant before us, was interested to purchase the property ( i.e. industrial plot No.88, measuring 2444.41 Sq.

[5] Yds, Industrial Area, I -9, Islamabad), owned by Mrs. Zahida Parveen Ahmed , who was, at all the relevant points of time, a non-resident Pakistani living in the United Kingdom, but for the affairs of her property, including its sale, had authorized her mother, namely, Begum Maroof Ahmed through a registered Power of Attorney dated 15th of November, 2002 [Ex.D -4(1)].

[6] The plaint iff therefore negotiated the sale with the Attorney. As a result of negotiation s, on 18th of December, 2002, the Attorney through a written contract (Ex.P.3 ) agreed to sell the property to the plaintiff for a consideration of Rs.7,100,000/ - (seventy one la c rupees only). Out of this consideration, a sum of Rs.250,000/ - (two lac fifty thousand rupees only) was paid by the plaintiff to the Attorney in presence of the witnesses and it was agreed that the balance amount would be payable on or before 18th of Mar ch, 2003 , but it was not paid and this led to a dispute between the parties.

[7] On 15th of September, 2003 , the plaintiff brought his suit before the trial Court seeking specific performance of the contract (Ex.P.3). In his suit he joined the Attorney, namely , Begum Maroof Ahmed as defendant No.1 and the Capital Development Authority as defendant No.2 . These two defendants resisted the suit by filing their separate written statements.

[8] On the pleadings, the trial Court by order dated 24th of January, 2004 , framed issues and called upon the parties to adduce their evidence. The statement of the plaintiff’s two witnesses, i.e. PW.1 & PW.2 was recorded on 24th of January, 2007 . At this stage the plaintiff realized his Civil Appeal No.1121 of 20 18 3 omission and thought it necessary to implead th e property owner as a defendant.

[9] He therefore applied to the trial Court on 11th of October, 2007 , under Order I, Rule 10 of the CPC to implead the owner as a defendant, so as to avo id any formal defect in the proc eedings. The trial Court allow ed the plain tiff to amend the plaint by adding the property owner. Needless to indicate here that the owner of the property being a party to the contract through her Attorney was a necessary party to the suit for the specific performance of the contract1 because in her absence no decree c ould be passed , and as such , she ought to have been included in it.

[10] In light of this position of law , the trial Court was justified in allowing the plaintiff to bring the owner of the property on record . The order of the trial Court was dated 25th of October, 2007 , and in pursuance thereof , an amended plaint was filed on 30th of October, 2007 , making the owner named Zahida Parveen Ahmed as defendant No.1 -A.

[11] Upon filing of the amended plaint by the plaintiff, notices were ordered to be issued to the newly added defendant No.1 -A. A memo was filed before the trial Court by the counsel of defendant No.1 - A, on 24th of November, 2007 , which provided that she was residing in Engl and and sought time to submit a duly attested power of attorney.

[12] However, she failed to do so, even after given several opportunities, and therefore, was proceeded against ex -parte by the trial Court and her defence was struck off. 4. Given the circumstances stated above, the first question, for our consideration, is whether the suit to the extent of owner of the property, who was subsequently added as defendant No.1 -A, was within time, and if not, could it be maintained against the other defendants.

[13] The answer to the first part of this question is not difficult to fi nd and we do not even need to wade through the various provisions of the law. Be it noted that the suit in which defendant No.1 -A was added was for the specific performance of the contract dated 18th of December, 2002 (Ex.P.3), which had fixed a date of 1 Section 27 of the Specific Relief Act, 18 77 Civil Appeal No.1121 of 20 18 4 18th of March, 2003 , for the performance.

[14] As such, according to Article 113 of the first schedule to the Limitation Act, 1908 , the plaintiff had a period of three years from the said date of performance to bring a suit against Zahida Parveen Ahmed , defendant No.1-A. She was not included as a defendant in the original plaint, however, since she was a necessary party being an owner of the property and party to the contract, the importance of adding her was felt during the recording of evidence, and to rectify t his omission, permission was sought from the trial Court, and it was granted on 25th of October, 2007, and accordingly amended plaint adding her was filed on 30th of October, 2007.

[15] Now, in terms of Section 22 of the Limitation Act, 1908, the suit would, as regards defendant No.1 -A, be deemed to have been instituted from the point of time when she was so made a party , and that would come to 30th of October, 2007 . Undoubtedly by that date a period of three years, computing it from the date of performance of t he contract , that is, 18th of March, 2003, had expired and therefore the suit, to her extent was not within time .2 5.

[16] We now enter upon the later part of the first question, whether the plaintiff cou ld maintain a suit against the A ttorney for specific pe rformance of the contract, particularly when it was not within time to the extent of the necessary party, that is to say, the owner of the property (defendant No.1 -A).

[17] It is not denied that defendant No.1 -A had authorized her mother, who is defendant No.1, through a registered power of attorney [Ex.D -4(1)], to sell her property. It is now well recognized that a power of attorney is the creation of the agency whereby the grantor (the principal) authorizes the grantee (the agent) to do the acts specified therein on behalf of the grantor (the principal), which, when executed will be binding o n the grantor (the principal) as if done by him .3 As such, it is ordinarily the function and the duty of an agent in his contractual dealings for his principal 2 Hayat and others v.

[18] Amir ( PLD 1982 SC 167 ) 3 Section 2 of the Power of Attorney Act, 1882 Civil Appeal No.1121 of 20 18 5 to act not only for and on account of his principal, but in the principal’s name . The recitals of the contract (Ex.P.3 ) and the evidence brought on record suggest that defendant No.1, acting as an agent /attorney , had disclosed the identity of her principal (defendant No.1-A) and intended to impose the obligations of the contract (Ex.P.3) upon defendant No.1 -A and also secured its advantages to her.

[19] Defendant No.1 had no benef icial interest in the contract ( Ex.P.3). It is a general rule that where a contract is made fo r and on account of the principal and in his name, and the agent has no beneficial interest in the contract , the right of action upon the contract is in the principal alone and the agent neither can sue and be sued upon it .4 This principal is also embedded in Section 230 of the Contract Act, 1872.

[20] We, therefore, are poised to conclude that defendant No.1, as an agent /attorney , acted for and on behalf of defendant No.1 -A and thus suit for specific performance of the contract was not maintainable against her, especially when the plaintiff had added defendant No.1 -A after the prescribed period of limitation ,5 and secondly, her status in it, at best, could only be regarded as a proper party and, in terms of Section 27 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877, specific p erformance of the contract (Ex.P.3) also could not be sought against her . 6.

[21] We will now tou ch upon the second question involved in this case , whether the plaintiff had been able to prove that at all material time he had been ready and willing to perform his obligatio ns arising out of the contract ( Ex.P.3). Such a question is a standard feature of the suit seeking a decree for the specific performance of the contract, and the answer to it not only contributes to determin e the parties’ rights but also prov ides a base for the Court in exercising its equitable jurisdiction.

[22] Determination of the readiness and willingness to perform the obligations emanating from the 4 Morton V. Stone (39 Minn 275), Denver Produce Co V. Taylor (73 Miss 702 ), Buckbee v. Brown [(21 Wend. (NY) 110 & (1)] & Angbats Aktiebolaget Bohuslanska Kusten, Sweden and (2) Bird & Co. (Pakistan) Ltd., Chittagong v.

[23] Central hardware Stores, Chittagong (PLD 1969 SC 463 ) 5 Muhammad Khan v. Abdul Khaliq Khan ( PLD 1981 SC 155) Civil Appeal No.1121 of 20 18 6 contract is a calculus for ascertaining the bona fide of the parties. As the initial burden is always on the plaintiff, he must first state in his plaint the facts demonstrating his readiness and willingness to perform his part of the contract and then prove it by producing convincing and reliable evidence.

[24] Mindful of these prefatory observations, we move on to the facts relating to this second question and the evidence on record. Before go ing any further, we wish to say that since this question is diverse, we will deal with it in three parts. 7. It would b e appropriate first to examine how the plaintiff discharged his pleading burden.

[25] The law governing this aspect of the matter is provided in Form No.47 and 48 in Appendix -A of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. According to para -2 of F orm 47, the plaintiff was to state in the plaint that he had applied to the defendants specifically to perform the contract on their part, but the defendants had not done so.

[26] Similarly, per para -2 of Form 48, the plaintiff was required to state in his plai nt that on such and such date, he tendered an amount to the defendants and demanded a transfer of the property .6 Thus, in his suit for specific performance, the plaintiff ought to have pleaded and proved his readiness and willingness to perform his obligat ions under the contract (Ex.

[27] P.3). There is no denying that according to contract conditions, the plaintiff was to pay the balance of Rs.6,850,000/ - to the defendants on or before 18th of March, 2023, subject to the registration/completion of property trans fer documents by the defendants in his favour. The plaintiff did not pay this amount.

[28] The plaintiff’s stance was that he had been ready to pay the balance , but, defendant No.1 procrastinated the matter and delayed the completion of the transfer documents, which led him to institute the suit. A perusal of the evidence suggests that the plaintiff could not prove his 6 Mst. Waris Jan and another v.

[29] Liaqat Ali and others ( PLD 2019 Lah 333), Muhammad Riaz and Ors. v. Badshah Begum and Ors. (2021 SCMR 605) & M/s DW Pakistan (Private) Limited, Lahore v. Begum Anisa Fazl -i-Mahmood and others (2023 SCMR 555) Civil Appeal No.1121 of 20 18 7 narrative. His witness PW.3, namely, Abdul Raoof, who was UDC in the Estate Management Department of the Capital Development Authority [(CDA)/def endant No.2 ], in his cross - examination, admitted that all CDA’s formalities for issuance of completion certificate had been compl ied with and as regards the property there was no failure on the part of defendant s No.1 and 1 -A.

[30] It alludes that it was not th e defendant s but the plaintiff who was negligent in performing his duty. It is one way of looking at the plaintiff’s defau lt in fulfilling his part of the obligation under the contract (Ex.P.3). 8. Notwithstanding the above, there is another facet of t he second question that provides us additional ground to decline the plaintiff’s appeal.

[31] There was no doubt that the plaintiff had to prove that he was always ready and willing to perform his obligations in terms of the contract, so it was also necessary f or him t o go into the witness box and give evidence that he had all along been ready and willing to perform his part of the contract , and would even subject himself to cross -examination on that issue.

[32] On the contrary, in this case, the plaintiff did not ap pear as a witness but instead produced his Attorney, Tasawa r Hussain, as PW.2. This was a material irregularity which vitiated the plaintiff’s claim. The plaintiff could not examine in his place, his Attorney who did not have personal knowledge about his readiness and willingness.

[33] His attorney was also irrelevant to the issue because he was neither involved in the negotiations culminated into the contract (Ex.P.3), nor signed the contract nor was he a w itness to it . What is more, readiness and willingness refer to the state of mind and conduct of the vendee, as also his capacity and preparedness on the other.

[34] One without the other is not sufficient. Therefore, the Attorney (PW.2 ), who had no personal kno wledge, could not give evidence about plaintiff’s readiness and willingness to perform the obligations in terms of the contract (Ex.P.3). In the wake of the above, the Attorney’s evidence must be excluded from consideration.

[35] If we do so, we do not find any Civil Appeal No.1121 of 20 18 8 other piece of evidence to accept the claim of the plaintiff that he had been ready and willing to perform obligations in terms of the contract. This, indeed, is fatal to the plaintiff’s suit. 9. From whatever angle we examine this case, we do not find anything on which we can base the plaintiff’s claim as valid.

[36] Even if we ignore the pitfalls mentioned earlier, one more remain and that too is deadly. In a suit for specific performance, the vendee also has to prove that at the appointed time, he had suff icient money with which he could pay the balance amount, or if he did not have such money, he made such arrangements, with the help of which, he could pay as promised.

[37] In this case, the contents of the plaintiff’s plaint and the evidence brought by him on record are completely silent on this essential element of the suit for specific performance of the contract. In other words, the plaintiff had failed to prove his readin ess to perform his obligations of the contract, therefore, his claim could not be allow ed, and as such, we think, the High Court has rightly dismissed it. 10.

[38] Having regard to our above finding s, the plaintiff is bound to fail in this appeal. We, therefore, dismiss this appeal and maintain the decree of the High Court. Judge Judge Judge B-II Islamabad, the 16.08.2023 “Approved for reporting” Sarfraz Ahmad & Agha M. Furqan, L/C