Case No: C.A.970/2003
Case Title: Atique-ur-Rahman VERSUS Haji Khan Afzal etc.
Subject: N/A
Judge: Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry
Judgment Date: 02-10-2006
Upload Date: 02-10-2006
Citations: 2007 SCMR 507
SC Citations: 2006 SCP 6
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/CJD_Civil_Appeal_No_970_of_2003.pdf

[1] judgment dated 2.6.2003 passed by the Peshawar High Court, Peshawar in Election Petition No. 29 of 2002) Atique Rehman … … Appellant Versus Haji Khan Afzal, etc … … Respondents For the Appellant: Mr. Wasim Sajjad, Sr. ASC Mr. Mehr Khan Malik, AOR For the Respondents: Mr. Abdul Aziz Kundi, AOR Date of Hearing: 2.10.2006 ORDER IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ : Instant appeal has been filed against th e judgment dated 2nd June 2003 passed by the Peshawar High Court, Peshawar in El ection Petition No. 29 of 2002.

[2] Precisely stating facts of the case are that appellant submitted nomination papers on 23rd August, 2002 to contest the Election of the Office of MPA from PF 42, Han gu-I. The Returning Officer after having examined his documents vide de tailed order dated 2nd September 2002 concluded that he was qualified to contest the election and thus in the contest, the appellant secured more votes to that of his opponent and as su ch was declared successful candidate.

[3] The respondent filed an Election Petition against the appellant, which was allo wed by the election Tribunal constituted CA  2 under Representation of People Act, 1976 and presided over by a learned Judge of the Peshawar High C ourt, vide judgment dated 2nd June 2003. The appellant has thus filed the instant app eal under Section 67(3) of the ibid Act [hereinafter referred to as the Act].

[4] Learned counsel for appellant contende d that no such ground in respect of the age of appellant le ss than 25 years on the date of filing the nomination papers, was taken in the election petition or at any subsequent stage by any of the contesting candidate, rather the Pres iding Officer of the Tribunal himself having posed the question regarding the age of the appellant on the date of filing of the nomination papers, held that he being less that 25 years of age was not qualified to contest the electi on.

[5] Learned counsel submitted that it was brought to the notice of Tribunal that much before the filing of nomination papers, a civil suit was filed by the appella nt for correction of his date of birth which was subsequently decreed in his favour and according to the verdict given by the Civil Court, he was above 25 years of age on the date of filing the nomination papers and the decree havi ng been not challenged, attained finality, which was still holding field to be given effect for all intents and purposes.

[6] The learned counsel for the respon dents, on the other hand, submitted that the decree in question was passed on the basis of medical certificate wherein the approximate age of the a ppellant was given which cannot be considered as conclusive evidence of hi s age and further the same having been obtained subsequent to the filing of nomin ation papers, may not be relevant to determine the correct age of the appellant on the targ et date, therefore, the High Court has rightly held that on th e day of filing of th e nomination papers, the appellant was not qualified to contest the election.

[7] CA  3 After hearing the learned counsel for the parties at length and having carefully perused the record with their assistance, we in the light of the provisions of Section 99 of the Act, 1976 have found that a candidate intending to contest election for the seat of member provincial Assembly must fulfill the condition contained therein in cluding attaining the age of 25 years on the date of filing the nomination pape r and should also be enrolled as voter in the constituency from which he is contesting the Election.

[8] The appellant having fulfilled the ab ove essential conditions contested the Election as a validly nom inated candidate therefore, it would hardly make any difference that decree was passed subsequent to 23rd August 2002 which was the last date for filing the nomin ation papers. It is evident from the contents of the decree that appellant has attained the age of 25 years much before the target date and the same havi ng been not assailed in the appropriate proceedings was still holding the field, so much so the application under Section 12 (2) CPC filed by the respo ndents for setting aside the decree was also dismissed.

[9] The validity of the de cree passed by the civil court neither could be challenged before the El ection Tribunal established under Representation of People Act, 1976 nor th e same could be ignored to be given legal effect and thus we are of the cons idered opinion that so long the decree of the Civil Court determining the age of appellant above 25 years on the date of filing of nomination papers was intact , the objection that he was less than 25 years of age on the date of nomina tion papers could not be raised to contend that he was suffering from disq ualification to contest the election.

[10] The contention regarding th e other conditions relatin g to the eligibility of appellant to contest the election is also without any substance. The appellant was enrolled as voter in the constitue ncy from which he was contesting the CA  4 election and he having been not fo und to have been suffering from any disqualification to contest the election was declared a validly nominated candidate.

[11] It may be noted that neith er any appeal was filed against the acceptance of nomination paper of the ap pellant nor the order passed in the application under Section 12 (2) CPC challenging the decree was further assailed and thus the Tribunal being no t competent to sit over the judgment of civil court would have no jurisdiction, to go beyond the decree and pass a contrary order in respect of age of appellant.

[12] In the light of forgoing reason s the appeal is allowed, impugned judgment is set aside and Election Petiti on filed by the respo ndent is dismissed with costs of Rs. 10,000/- (Rupees ten thousand only). Chief Justice Judge Islamabad 02.10.2006 MS/* Not Approved For Reporting