Case No: C.M.A.5216/2012
Case Title: Against appointment of Raja Azeemul Haq as Executive Director of the World Bank
Subject: Miscelleneous
Judge: MR. JUSTICE AMIR HANI MUSLIM
Judgment Date: 06-06-2013
Upload Date: 08-06-2013
Citations: 2014 SCMR 949
SC Citations: 2013 SCP 69
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/C.M.A.5216OF2012.pdf

[1] order s, the Secretary Establishment Division has appeared in Court. For our perusal he has produced the original record containing summery to the Prime Minister regarding appointment of Muhammad Azeem -ul-Haq Minhas as Executive Director/Alternate Executive Director of the Worl d Bank and other CMA. 2 relevant correspondence.

[2] Original file is returned to him with the direction that a complete photostate copies set of this file be provided to the office within three days. 2. Muhammad Azeem -ul-Haq Minhas , is present in Court . His counsel Mr. Afnan Karim Kundi, ASC, has filed a statement in writing which reads as under : - 1.

[3] I have complete faith in this august Court that it is open to conviction and will do complete justice in the matter. 2. This august Court was very kind to accommodate my request for fixing the matter of yesterday to enable me to personally appear and assist the Court, for which I am grateful. 3. This august Court was also very gracious in giving me a patient audience and going through my past service record, which enab led me to explain that I have been a career civil/government servant. 4.

[4] Yet like any other case, I am cognizant of the fact that this case could have a favourable outcome or otherwise for me. 5. Keeping in view my age and future prospects (life permitting ), I would like to avoid any controversy and have thus tendered my resignation from the position of AED to the Executive Director (EDS -06) at World Bank this morning. 6.

[5] Also since the said position represents my homeland Pakistan and six other friendly countries, I would not like any embarrassment caused to Pakistan in any manner. 7. I would most humbly request this august Court that the Suo Motu Notice in my case (CMA .) may kindly therefore be discharged as having become infructuous. 3.

[6] Alongwith the above statement he has also placed on record a copy of his resignation dated 6.6.2013 and a Fax transmission confirmation print. CMA. 3 4. Further hearing of Civil Misc. Application No. is adjourned to a date in office after two weeks. Meanwh ile, in case , Muhammad Azeem -ul-Haq Minhas receives confirmation regarding acceptance of his resignation from the World Bank a copy thereof may be placed on record.