Case No: C.M.A.4581/2013
Case Title: Application by Muhammad Younis against Arif Mehmood Gill, MPA
Subject: Miscelleneous
Judge: MR. JUSTICE TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, HCJ
Judgment Date: 09-04-2014
Upload Date: 09-04-2014
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2014 SCP 31
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/cma.4581_2013.pdf

[1] ORDER TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, CJ .- We have heard learned counsel for the applicant and respondent Arif Mehmood and have also perused the record produced by the Assistant Controller (Record) of the Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education, Faisalabad. 2. Applicant’s learned counsel read out the detailed statement of Assistant Controller (Record) of the Board of Intermediate & Secondary Education, Faisalabad dated 22.4.2013, according to whom, the FA certificate of the respondent was fake because on the date of FA examination, the responde nt Arif Mehmood purportedly appeared at two centers i.e. at one as a private candidate and at the other as a regular candidate.

[2] The admission form as a private candidate bears pink colour whereas the admission form of regular students is yellowish white. 3. Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the only evidence against the respondent is the statement of Mr. Fida Hussain, Assistant Controller (Record) whereas a close look at the admission forms would indicate that in the pink form (private adm ission form) his metric roll number is correctly written as 11592 and his name also has been correctly written as Arif Mehmood.

[3] However, in the yellowish white admission form (regular admission form) the matriculation roll number is incorrectly written as 18592 and even the name has not been correctly written i.e. Arif Mehmood Gill. Adds that in the degree of Bachelor of Arts of respondent regarding which there is no dispute, his name is written as Arif Mehmood.

[4] He lastly submitted that in 2003 pursuant to the direction issued by the learned Lahore High Court in a petition filed by some other objector, a detailed inquiry was carried out by the Board of Intermediate & Secondary Education and the FA degree of the respondent was found to be genuine. 4. We hav e examined the record to which reference has been made by learned counsel for the respondent with the assistance of Board official and find that the submissions made by respondent’s learned counsel prima facie are not without substance.

[5] But in these procee dings no conclusive finding can be given. If applicant still wishes to challenge the authenticity of the FA degree of the respondent, he may take recourse to other remedy, if available under the law. 5. In the afore -referred circumstances, the suo moto n otice issued to the respondent as also the order of suspension of his membership from Provincial Assembly seat dated 25.9.2013 is withdrawn.

[6] This CMA is disposed of in terms noted above. CHIEF JUSTICE JUDGE JUDGE Islamabad, the 9th of April, 2014 Not Approved For Reporting Khurram