Case No: C.M.A.2915/2013
Case Title: Amina Masood Janjua v. The State through M/o Interior and others
Subject: U/A 184(3)
Judge: MR. JUSTICE SH. AZMAT SAEED
Judgment Date: 26-07-2013
Upload Date: 26-07-2013
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2013 SCP 106
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/cma.2916_etc._26.07.2013.pdf

[1] ORDER The learned Additional Attorney General for Pakistan has placed on record , a list of 6 4 persons supplied to CMA No.2915 -2013 etc -1.doc - 2 - him by the Secretar y, FATA and stated that they are confined in the different Internment Centers . However, the detail of the cases in which they are involved, if any , has not been mentio ned.

[2] Similarly, he stated that about 504 persons , list of which has been prepared by the Secretary PATA , are confined in different Internment Centres. 2. The learned Addl. Attorney General may file both the lists in the office within three days alongwit h the details, if any, about their involvement in the criminal cases and in the column of the remarks , it would also be mentioned as to why they are not proceed ing against them , if there are some cases against them . 3.

[3] The learned Addl. Attorney General has stated that, as per the direction of the Court , some of the internees have provided an opportunity to meet with their relatives . However, we direct that they may prepare SOPs and a focal person should be appointed preferably to be the District and Sessions Judge s in the area where Internment Centres are situated and they are discharging their duties otherwise the Political Agent or the Deputy Commissioner would himself be a focal person and he (they) would be responsible to CMA No.2915 -2013 etc -1.doc - 3 - manage the meeting of the rel atives according to rules without causing any inconvenience to them. 4.

[4] On the last date of hearing, we have also pointed out about provid ing the medical treatment to the detenues , as there was a complaint before us that for want of medical facility and food their health is deteriorating day by day. The report in this behalf may be called from both the Secretar ies FATA and PATA before the next date of hearing so that we may pass an appropriate order , if need be.

[5] Although, w e have already observed that a human being , who is kept in Internment Centre , is entitled for the food and medicine s, as per his fundamental right s. 5. On receipt of the report s from both the agencies , noted herein above , the matter shall be taken up further for the purpose of passing an appropriate order.

[6] Adjourned to a date in office after 10 days. Chief Justice Judge Judge Islamabad, the 26th July, 2013 Not approved for reporting M. Safdar Mahmood/* IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN (Original Jurisdiction) PRESENT : Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja Mr. Justice Sh.

[7] Azmat Saeed CMA NO. IN CMA NO. IN HRC NO. (Amina Masood Janjua Vs. The State through M/o Interior and others) AND CMA NO. IN CMA NO. IN HRC NO. (Amina Masood Janjua Vs. The State through M/o Interior and others) For the Applicant : Mrs. Amina Masood Janjua On Court’s Notice : Mr. Tariq Mehmood Khokhar, Addl.

[8] A.G. Malik Faisal Rafique, Addl. A.G. Mr. I hsan Elahi, I.O. Qazi Muhammad Amin, ASC Mr. Ghulam Shabbir, AS I Date of Hearing : 26.07.2013. O R D E R It is informed by the learned Additional Attorney General for Pakistan that now he has been instructed by the Ministry of Defence , Government of Pakistan, to cross -examine the witness, namely, Ihsan Elahi in th is case.

[9] It is to be noted that on the last date of hearing , a request was made to engage another counsel for the purpose of cross -examination . Before recording his statement during the hearing of the case, SHO -Ihsan Elahi pointed out that he has conducted an CMA., etc. 2 independent investigation and examined Malik Amir Farooq, owner of Coal Mines where both the missing p ersons, namely , M/s.

[10] Umer Hayat and Ume r Bakh at were employed as labourers and the former SHO - Badar Munir, SI -Khizer Hayat (Police Post Incharge, Basharat ) and ASI-Wajid Ali as well as ASI Shabbir Ahmad who accompanie d the persons to whom the officials went to the Co al Mines of Malik Amir Farooq and there from both the above mentioned missing persons were picked up and were taken away by the agencies. 2.

[11] In such view of the matter instead of examining the statement of I hsan Elahi and others before the Sup reme Court of Pakistan, we send this case to the learned District and Sessions Judge, Chakwal, for recording the statement s of Ihsan Elahi, Badar Munir, Khizar Hay at, Shabbir Ahmad and Wajid Ali as well as Malik Amir Farooq, owner of the Co al Mines, subjec t to allowing an opportunity o f cross -examin ation.

[12] T he Ministry of Defence , shall depute a counsel after seeking necessary information from the learned Additional Attorney General for Pakistan whereas Prosecutor shall appear on behalf of State to assist th e Court. 3. The learned District and Sessions Judge, after recording the evidence of the persons noted herein above and any other material brought by the complainant or other persons interested in this case shall record the find ing as to whether M/s.

[13] Um er Hay at and Ume r Bakh at had been picked away by the agencies/persons as it is alleged by the police and whether presently they are in custody of which agency. CMA., etc. 3 4. The requisite report shall be sent by the learned District & Sessions Judge, Chakwal, before the next date of hearing . 5.

[14] Put up on 05.08.2013. Chief Justice Islamabad Judge 26.7.2013 Mahtab/* Judge IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN (Original Jurisdiction) PRESENT : Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed CMA NO. IN CMA NO. IN HRC NO. (For Recovery of Ghul am Sajjad Amjad) (Amina Masood Janjua Vs.

[15] The State through M/o Interior and others) For the Applicant : Mrs. Amina Masood Janjua On Court’s Notice : Mr. Tariq Mehmood Khokhar, Addl. AGP Mr. Faisal Rafique, Addl. AG Pb Mr. Muhammad Shoaib, DSP Mr. Muhammad Akram, Inspector Date of Hearing : 26.07.2013. O R D E R Mrs. Amina Masood Janjua, has placed on record an affidavit through CMA No .4910 of 2013 in view of our observation made in the Order dated 25.07.2013.

[16] A perusal of the same suggest s that Ghu lam Sajjad Amjad son of Basara, resident of Islamkot, Kabeerwala along with other two persons, namely, Muhammad Saleem , Alipur and Muhammad Saleem, Multan were present in Qasim Bela, Multan Cantt . 2. Copy of the same be handed over to the learned Additional Attorney General for Pakistan and issue a notice to him to ensure the production/recovery of Ghulam Sajjad Amjad on the next date of CMA.2 , etc. 2 hearing .

[17] He should also ensure to furnish the details of the other two person s, named herein before who were confined in the said Camp along with detail ed reasons, if any, for which they were detained over there. 2. Adjourned to 2nd August, 2013. Chief Justice Islamabad Judge 26.7.2013 Mahtab/* Judge IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN (Original Jurisdiction) PRESENT : Mr.

[18] Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed CIVIL MISC. APPLICATION NO.3956 OF 2013 (For recovery of Muhammad Farhaj Waheed Butt) IN CIVIL MISC. APPLICATION NO.3762 OF 2012 IN HUMAN RIGHTS CASE NO.965 OF 2005. Amina Masood Janjua. Applicant (s) VERSUS The State through M/o Interior and others.

[19] Respondent (s) For the Applicant : Mrs. Amina Masood Janjua On Court’s Notice : Mr. Tariq Mehmood Khokhar, Additional Attorney General for Pakistan Mr. Faisal Rafique , Additional A.G. Pb. with Mr. Khan Baig, IGP and Mr. Umar Virk, SSP ( CTD) Date of Hearing : 26.07.2013. O R D E R Mr. Khan Baig, Provincial Poli ce Officer (IGP), Punjab, Lahore , has submitted a report (CMA No.4911 of 2013) in response to our Order dated 23.07.2013.

[20] It has also been informed by Mr. Ume r Virk, SSP (CT D) that Farh aj Waheed Butt is presently confined in Central Jail, Kot Lakhpat, Laho re, along with other three persons, namely, Usman Basra , Rana Abdul Rehman and N emat Ullah (under police remand since 15th July, 2013), as they are involved in the CMA., etc. 2 different FIRs bearing No. of Police Station, Faisal Town, Lahore,  of Polic e Station Ghalib Market, Lahore and  of Police Station, Gulberg, Lahore.

[21] As far as the involvement of Farha j Waheed Butt along with others in criminal cases is concerned , it needs no comments at this stage as Mrs. Maria wife of Farha j Waheed Butt has different version . 2. According to her version noted in order dated 23.7.2013 , initially Abdul Waheed Butt father of Farha j Waheed Butt was picked up by the police in the month of September , 2011 and when Farha j Waheed Butt appeared before the police , the father was released .

[22] Thereafter, Mr. Umar Virk, SSP, arranged the meeting of Abdul Waheed Butt with his son Farha j Waheed Butt. Now when we have issued notice on 23.07.2013, direct ing the Inspector General of Police to appear and produce him as he wa s in the police custody. Now it is informed that he is in the Central Jail, Kot Lakhpat, Lahore , along with others from the date as noted herein before.

[23] Thus, the question is that as to whether previously he was kept in illegal detention and because of present proceedings , he has been surfaced . 3. Under the circumstances, the Inspector General of Police is directed to conduct thorough probe into the matter personally after having taken into consideration all the attending circumstances and evidence, etc. 4.

[24] At the same time, Mr. Naz ir Ahmed Gujanah , learned District & Sessions Judge, Chinot , is appointed to conduct an inquiry CMA., etc. 3 to ascertain questions of detention of Farhaj Waheed Butt from the month of September, 2011 to 15th July, 2013, if it is a true ve rsion alongwith Role of Police and submit a report for our perusal.

[25] It is to be pointed out that the learned District and Sessions Judge may examine any witness, including Abdul Waheed Butt or Farhaj Waheed Butt who along with others is presently confined in the Central Jail, Kot Lakhpat, Lahore. The l ogistic arrangements shall be made by the Registrar of the learned Lahore High Court to facilitate the learned District & Sessions Judge in preparing the report.

[26] On receipt of the report from both the functio naries, the matter shall be decided further. 5. Petitioner -Mrs. Amina Masood Janjua, pointed out that Mrs. Maria wife of Farhaj Waheed Butt has been threatened for approaching this Court. T he Inspector General of Police who is present in Court is directed to provide proper protection to her and ensure her safe appearance before this Court on the next date of hearing. 6.

[27] Adjourned to 2nd August, 2013. This Order be communicated to all concerned during course of the day. Chief Justice Islamabad Judge 26.7.2013 Mahtab/* Judge