Case No: C.M.A.64/2013
Case Title: Workers Party and others v. Federation of Pakistan and others
Subject: Election-National Assembly/Others
Judge: Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed
Judgment Date: 30-04-2013
Upload Date: 30-04-2013
Citations: PLD 2013 SC 406
SC Citations: 2013 SCP 46
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/C.M.A.64of2013-dt-30-4-2013.pdf

[1] judgment dated 08.06.2012 passed in Const. P.No.) AND CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NO.191 OF 2012 IN CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.87 OF 2011. Workers Party and others. … Petitioner (s) (in both cases) VERSUS Federation of Pakistan and others. … Respondent (s) (in both cases) For the petitioner (s): Mr. Abid Hassan Minto, Sr.

[2] ASC Mr. Bilal Hassan Minto, ASC Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR On Court’s Call : Mr. Irfan Q adir, Attorney General for Pakistan For Election Commission of Pakistan: Mr. Muhammad Munir, Paracha, Sr. ASC Mr. Abdul Rehman, Addl. DG (Elections) Date of hearing: 15.01.2013 CMA. in Const.P., etc. 2 ORDER This Court in the case of Workers ’ Party Pakistan through Akht ar Hussain, Advocate, General Secretary and 6 others Vs.

[3] Federation of Pakistan and 2 others (PLD 2012 SC 681) pronounced on 8th June, 2012, issued various directions to the Election Commission of Pakistan , to organize and conduct the election s and to make such arrangements as are necessary to ensure that the election s are conducted honestly, justly, fairly and in accordance with law and that corrupt practices are g uarded against in terms of Article 218 (3) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1 973, as the National and Provincial Assemblies are about to complete their tenure, therefore, the learned counsel for the petitioner s submitted an application stating therein non - implementation of the judgment so far.

[4] A comprehensive reply (CMA No.1 75 of 2013) has been submitted by the Election Commission of Pakistan , inter alia , stating therein that: “The ECP has made all necessary preparation s that are required to be in place for conducting a free, fair and transparent election in the country and is ready to hold elections in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and the law.” 2.

[5] The learned Attorney General for Pakistan, during hearing of the case was asked to point out the stand of the Federal Government to hold General Elections, which are round the corner as previously on 20th February, 2008, elections w ere held and in CMA. in Const.P., etc. 3 terms of Article 52, the National Assembly is about to complete its term of five years from the day of its first meeting , as is commanded by Article 52 read with Ar ticle 224 (1) and (2).

[6] He filed a statement under his signature on behalf of the Federation, which reads as under: “STATEMENT OF ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR PAKISTAN Upon receipt of instructions on telephone from the Prime Minister of Pakistan, I state as follows: “That the Federal Government desires that free and fair elections be held in the country on time in accordance with the Law and the Constitution”.

[7] On receipt of instructions on telephone from the Prime Minister, the learned Attorney General for Pakistan stated that the Federal Government des ires that free and fair el ections be held in the country on time in accordance with the law and the Constitution. It is to be noted that as the Federal Government is itself desirous of conducting /holding free and fair elections in the country in accordance with the law and the Constitution, therefore, the Election Commission of Pakistan, is directed to g ear up to hold the forthcoming elections in accordance with the Constitution, particularly, meeting the requi rements of holding free and fair elections.

[8] CMA. in Const.P., etc. 4 3. In the reply, which has been filed by the Election Commission of Pakistan , statements have been made to implement the judgment stepwise. The learned counsel for the petitioner is required to go through the same. Similarly, learned Attorney General for Pakistan, after having gone through the reply, shall assist th is Court , on the issues raised in the judgment as well as the implementation report, which has been filed today.

[9] The learned Attorney General may un dertake an exercise to fulfill the directions of th is Court in respect of directions mentioned in para 81 (l) , (m) and (n), which for reference are reproduced herein below: “(l) The Election Commission is obliged to ensure that all elections witness a sub stantial participation of the electorate, therefore, all necessary steps must be taken to make voting compulsory in Pakistan as early as possible; (m) In the ‘First Past the Post’ system of election, the winning candidate does not necessar ily receive an absolute majority of all votes cast, therefore, such a candidate does not command the majority of the votes polled.

[10] As such, the system of ‘First Past the Post’ violates the principle of majority. The Election Commission may explore ways and means to intro duce appropriate system of election including ‘run off election’ and ‘none of the above options’, in the light of the discussion made hereinabove, to ensure true representation of the people and rule of the majority; and (n) The Election Commission is em powered to frame rules to ensure that the elections are conducted justly, fairly, honestly and in accordance with law and that corrupt practices are guarded against.

[11] There is unanimity of views on various suggested courses of action. CMA. in Const.P., etc. 5 Therefore, we directed the Election Commission to frame rules and issue instructions to provide legal sanction to these measures and implement the same to achieve the ultimate objective of fair, free, just and honest election.” 4.

[12] Mr. Bilal Hassan Minto, learned counsel state d that the object noted hereinabove can be achieved, provided Rules under Section 107 of the Representation of the People Act, 1976 , are framed to achieve the object and purpose of Section 28, which provides that: “An election under this Act shall be deci ded by secret ballot and , subject to the provisions of section 29 every elector shall cast his vote by inserting in accordance with the provisions of this Act, in the ballot box, a ballot paper in the prescribed form.” He further stated that the object of the compulsory voting , if achieved , would fulfill the requirement of the Constitution incorporated in Article 2A , according to which , “the State shall exercise its powers and authority through the chosen representatives of the people”. 5.

[13] Let this case b e adjourned for 16th January, 2013 and be fixed at Serial No.1. Chief Justice Judge Islamabad, the Judge 15th January, 2013.