Case No: C.M.A.1674/2013
Case Title: Hamid Mir and another v. Federation of Pakistan and others
Subject: Miscelleneous
Judge: Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja
Judgment Date: 17-04-2013
Upload Date: 17-04-2013
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2013 SCP 41
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/CMA1674OF2013-DT-17-4-2013.pdf

[1] order wherein it had been noted that the two -Member Commission appointed by the Co urt had submitted its report on ToR No. F. This ToR mandated the Commission “to enquire into allegations of media related corruption and suggest steps to ensure impartial and independent media for the upcoming elections” .

[2] The report on ToR No.F is dated 21 .3.2013. Notice was issued to the Election Commission of Pakistan. Mr. Ishtiaq Ahmad Khan, Secretary ECP has appeared. He states that the ECP is already seized of the matter relating to the media Code of Conduct particularly in the context of the forthcomi ng elections.

[3] A draft Code of Conduct has been prepared by the ECP whereas another draft has been proposed by the media bodies and personnel. The ECP is considering these two draft Codes of Conduct. The report on ToR No. F, which has been filed in Court by the worthy Commission, shall also be handed over to the ECP and the parties in these proceedings.

[4] The ECP shall, therefore, take into consideration, in its deliberations, the report/recommendations of the Commission while finalizing the Code of Conduct fo r the media. Since the activities in relation to the elections have already commenced wherein political parties and others are actively engaged, it is our expectation that the ECP shall revise and issue its Code of Conduct.

[5] According to the Secretary, ECP, this exercise shall be completed within one week from today. Order accordingly. Const. P. 105 of 2012 etc. 3 2. Vide order dated 20.12.2012, we had directed that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting shall submit details of the secret funds in Court. We had also observed that, if at all, the Ministry claimed privilege against disclosure of information, it shall disclose the basis for claiming such privilege.

[6] Para 13 of our order dated 20.12.2012 was passed in the following terms: - “Prima facie, while the Ministry may claim priv ilege from making public disclosure of certain parts of its budget, such privilege is not automatically available to the Government. It must be claimed from the Court. Information for which secrecy is sought must be clearly marked and the reasons for seeki ng secrecy must also be clearly stated.

[7] The Court can then make a determination on this point in line with the law and the Constitution”. The Ministry shall do the needful before the next date of hearing. 3. Other Ministries also statedly were utilizin g funds without disclosure. We have also received an application (H.R.C No.12076 -S/2013) wherein it has been alleged that a summary has been approved for making payment of very heavy amounts for the purpose of advertisements in a media campaign.

[8] It is also alleged that these funds are likely to be disbursed in violation of rules. It has been further alleged that the summaries in respect of disbursement of substantial amounts was approved after the expiry of the term of the previous government. The learned D AG shall ascertain the correct factual position and submit a report before the next date of hearing.

[9] Until the next date of hearing, disbursement to any advertising agent/media house shall not be made. The learned DAG shall provide particulars of any such summaries which may have been approved starting from 10.3.2013. 4. To come up on 8.4.2013. Judge Judge Islamabad, 2nd April,2013 A.Rehman