Case No: C.M.A.2012/2023
Case Title: The President of Pakistan & others v. Justice Qazi Faez Isa
Subject: Withdrawal/.
Judge: Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial
Judgment Date: 10-04-2023
Upload Date: 21-07-2023
Citations: PLD 2023 SC 621
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 195
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.m.a._2012_2023_10042023.pdf

[1] ORDER OF HON’BLE CHIEF JUSTICE 10.04.2023 For the applicant(s)/appellant(s) Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan, Attorney General for Pakistan Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AG . . . . . . . . Through the se 18 C ivil Misc. Applications the appellants seek the withdraw al of the ir curative review petition s filed against the Supreme Court’s (“the Court ”) decision dated 26.04.202 1 given i n its review jurisdic tion in Justic e Qazi Faez Isa Vs.

[2] President of Pakistan (PLD 20 22 SC 119 ) (“Subject Judgment ”). 2. The facts giving rise to the present withdraw al applications are that by a majority of 6-4 the Court vide the Subject Judgment allowed the r eview petitions filed by Mr. Justice Qazi Fa ez Isa and other parties against the decision of th e Court dated 19.06. 2020 delivered in Justice Qazi Faez I sa Vs.

[3] Pr esident of Pakistan (PLD 2021 SC 1 ) (“original judgment ”). As a result, certain direc tions issue d to the Federa l Board of Reve nue and the Supreme Judicial Council by the original judgment were recalled . Aggrie ved by the Subject Judgment , the appellant s preferred curative review petition s befor e the Court on 25.05.2021 . 3.

[4] The Institut ion Officer raised certain objections on the filing of the curative review petitions . The main objection urged was that the purpose behind seeking a curative revie w is to avail a second review which is not enterta inable under Order XXVI, Rule 9 of the Supreme Court R ules, 1980 (“1980 Rules ”).

[5] In respon se to the objec tions, the appellant s filed chamber appeal s under Order V , Rule 3 of the 1980 Rules . During the pendency of these appeals on 31.03.2023 the President , whilst acting on the advice of the Prime Minist er, granted his author isation to the concerned CMA NO. 2012 OF 2 023 ETC. 9 ASC/AOR for the w ithdrawa l of the curative review petitions filed by the appellants .

[6] These withdrawal applicat ions are fixed for decision in Chambers today. 4. The learned Att orney General for Pakistan and t he learned Ad ditional Attorney General for Pakis tan entered appear ance on be half o f the appellant s. The rationale behind withdrawing the curative review petitions is reflected in the Federal Cabinet ’s decision dated 27.07.2022 .

[7] Essentially the legal point s pressed are: i. That the 1980 R ules prohibit the filing of a second review petition after the final dispo sal of the first review petition ; and ii. That the curative review petitions ha ve been filed on the strength of a judgm ent delivered by the Indian Supreme Court (“SCI”) in Rupa Ashok Hurra Vs.

[8] Ashok Hurra (AIR 2002 SC 1 771) wherein the SCI had explicitly recognise d its right to ‘re-consider its judgments in exercise of its inherent power .’ However, no pronounceme nt to such effect has been made by the Court . Hence, the conc ept of a curative review petition is alien to the law s and j urisprudence of Pakistan and the refore these petitions being not maint ainable are liable to be withdrawn. 5.

[9] I have heard the learned Attorney General and have also perused the re cord. The bar on filing a second review petition is declared in the 1980 Rules in the following words: “ORDER XXVI REVIEW ... 9. After the final disposal of t he first application for review no subsequent application for review shall lie to the Court and consequently shall not be entertained by the Registr y.” This bar has also been affirmed by a 5 Member Bench of the Court in Khalid Iqbal Vs.

[10] Mirza Khan (PLD 2015 SC 50 ) at para 12. Therefore , under the current scheme of the law the appellant s appear to be precluded from filing a review against the Subject Judgment because it has finally CMA NO. 2012 OF 2 023 ETC. 10 disposed of the review petition s filed against th e original judgment . 6.

[11] Be that as it may , the Court in the past has of its own motio n correct ed its decisions wherein wron g princ iples of law have been laid down . In this rega rd the dict um of the Court in the case of Khalid Iqbal (supra) is illustrative: “13. This, however, do es not mean that the jurisdiction of this Court is barred by an y restriction placed by the Constitution; there is no Arti cle in the Constitution which imp oses any restriction o r bar on this Court to revisit its earlier decision or even to depart from them, nor the doctrine of stare decisis will come in its way so long as revisiting of the judgment is warranted, in view of th e significant impact on the funda mental rights of citiz ens or in the interest of public good .

[12] This issue was fully compr ehended and ans wered in the case titled Regarding pensionary benefits of the Judges of Superior Cou rts from the Date of their respective retirements, irrespective of their length of service as such Judges (PLD 2013 SC 829 at page 993) . The relevant portion s are reproduce d herein below :--… 4. … Therefore, if any law which has been invalidly pronounced and declared by this Court , which in particular is based upon ignoranc e of any provisions of the Constitution, and/or is founded on gross and grave misinterp retation thereo f; the provisions of the relevant law have been ignored, misrea d and misapplied; the law already enunciated and settled b y this Court on a specific subjec t, has not been taken into account, all this, inter alia, shall constitute a given judg ment(s) as per incuriam … Therefore, if a judgm ent or a decision of this Court which is found to be per incuriam … it shall be the duty of this Court to correct such wrong verdict and to set the law right.

[13] And the Court should not shun from such a duty … On perusal of the paragraphs referred to hereinabove, we can safely reach a concl usion that this Court has absolute powers to re -visit, to review and or to set aside its ea rlier judgments/orders by invoking its Suo Motu Jurisdiction under Articles 184(3), 187 or 188 of the Constitution .

[14] The Powers of this Court to exercise its inherent jurisdiction under t he above refer red Articles of the Con stitution are not depend [e]nt upo n an application of a party .” (emphasis supplied ) What becomes apparent from the above-quoted passages is that our jurisprudence recognise s the Court ’s Suo Mot u jurisdiction under Article 184(3) and Article 188 read with Article 187 of the Constitution to re-visit, review or set aside CMA NO. 2012 OF 2 023 ETC. 11 its judg ments/orders that h ave finally disposed of the first review petition s.

[15] However, such jurisdiction has so far not been invoked by the Court in t he present matter . 7. Insofar, as the principle of curative review petit ions is concerned , it is not disputed by the appellants that the existence of this jurisd iction has hithert o not been considered by the Court. In fact, a ll the judgmen ts cited by them in support of their curative review petit ions reiterate what has been held above : that a second review is barred by law and that the Court alone is empowered, if so inclined, to re-visit, review or set aside an y of its previous judgment s/orders. 8.

[16] Further a study of the Indian law on curative r eview reveal s that it is a remedy altogether distinct from the Suo Motu exercise of jurisdiction by the Court . Whereas c urative review has no standing in our juris prudence the availability of Suo Mo tu review has long been accepted by the Court , albeit in the limited circumstances of doing complete justic e under Article 184(3) and /or Article 188 read with Article 187 of the Const itution .

[17] It is of course clear that both ty pes of judicial interven tions , curative review and Suo Motu review, possess a similar purpose i.e., to correct a fundamental error in a p revious judgment/o rder. However, the key differe nce, inter alia , between the two jurisdictions lies mainly in their mode and manner of invocation .

[18] Order XLVIII, Rule 2 of the Supre me Court Rules , 2013 mandat es that c urative review must be invoked by a part y: “Order XLVIII CURATI VE PETITION … 2. (1) The petitioner, in the curative petition, shall aver spe cifically that the grounds mentioned therein had been taken in the Review Petition and that it was dismisse d by circulation. ” (emphasis supplied ) CMA NO. 2012 OF 2 023 ETC. 12 On the oth er hand, Suo Motu review can only be invoked by the Court in its discretion , including on the information received from an aggrieved or concerne d party.

[19] Therefore , the lack of the proceedings being initiated by a party is inconsequential to the Court ’s exe rcise of Suo Motu jurisdiction . That does not app ear to be the case for curative review petitions filed in the SCI. 9. In the present case no Hon ’ble Mem ber of the Bench that deli vered the Subject Judgment (nor any other Judge of the Court) h as so far considered it necessary to re -visit, review or set aside th at judgment on the ground that it has had a significant im pact on the Funda mental Right s of citizens ; or th at it is in the interest of the public good; or that it is per incuriam .

[20] Consequently , in the absence of such a judicial view and the lack of an enabling jurisdiction that allows a n aggrieved o r concerned party to file a second review, the appellant s curative review petitions appear to be not maint ainable . 10. In the above circu mstances the ordin ary course of action would have been to refer the matter t o the Court for a conclusive determination on its maintainabi lity.

[21] However, the appellant s are now seeking the withdrawal of their curative review pe titions . This right of the appellant s to withdraw their curative review petitions (and generally of parties to withdraw th eir cases) is acknowledged by the law [ref: Reviews on behalf of Ju stice (R etd.) Abdul Ghani Sheikh (PLD 2013 SC 1024 ].

[22] Exceptions to the said rule exist for instance public interest litigation filed under Article 184(3) of the Constitution cannot be withdrawn except with the permission of the Cou rt [ref: Jurists Foun dation Vs. Federal Governmen t (PLD 2020 SC 1) at para 6 ]. But that exception is not applicab le to the instant case becau se it is not litigation in the public interest .

[23] Rather the present CMA NO. 2012 OF 2 023 ETC. 13 matter emanat es from Article 2 09 of the Co nstitution which grants the Suprem e Judi cial Council , and not the Court, the exclusive power to inquire into the misconduct of a Superior Court Jud ge. Therefore, the appellant s retain the unconditional right to withdraw the ir curative review petitions filed against the Subject Judgment.

[24] This result is, however, without prejudice to what has been noted above , namely, that the pendency of proceedings o r the presence of a party is no t necessary for the Court to exercise Suo Motu jurisdiction . All that is required for the Court t o act is cogniz able i nformati on. 11. The instant Civil Mis c.

[25] Appli cations filed by the appellant s are accordingly allowed and their curative review petitions are dismissed as withdrawn. Sd/- Umar Ata Bandial Chief Justice APPROVED FOR REPORTING