Case No: C.M.A.7679/2013
Case Title: Workers Party Pakistan thr. Akhtar Hussain v. Federation of Pakistan & others
Subject: Election-National Assembly/Others
Judge: MR. JUSTICE TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, HCJ
Judgment Date: 16-12-2013
Upload Date: 18-12-2013
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2013 SCP 148
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/cma.7679_2013.pdf

[1] ORDER TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, CJ.- Through this application , applicant who h eads a political party makes a grievance that the direction s given by this Court in the judgment reported at Workers Party Pakistan Vs. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2012 SC 681) have not been complied with ; that in the said judgment this Court had made certain declarations /observations and issued certain directions /instructions to ensure that the General Elections are free, fair and transparent; that there had been massive rigging in elections held on 11.5.2013 and the major victim of the said rigging h as been applicant’s party while .

[2] While arguing the application, l earned counsel in particular referred to various incidents / irregularities in four constituencies and submitted that a direction be issued for recounting of the votes CMA No.  in CRP No.  in Constitution Petition No.  2 cast as it would give a broad / general idea as to the extent of rigging, which according to him has eroded the sanctity of the Elections . 2.

[3] On Court query with regard to the maintainability of this application in view of the bar contained in Article 225 of the Constitution an d in terms of Article 184(3) of the Constitution under which this application has been filed, learned counsel for the applicant referred to para 32 at page 719 of the afore - mentioned judgment wherein this Court inter alia adverted to the jurisdiction of th is Court in terms of Article 184(3) and had observed that the Court would have jurisdiction if the issue raised (a) relates and affects the Fundamental Rights provision s of the Constitution which in the instant case are Article s 17 & 25, (b) if it is publi c interest litigation ; and (c) the proceedings are not adversarial rather are more than in the nature of being inquisitorial.

[4] At this stage Mr. Imran Khan sought permission to speak . However, this Court apprised him of the practice of this Court and the fact that he is represented by an able Member of the Bar. He requested for a few minutes and was allowed to speak . According to him the issue raised is not party specific rather it relates to the functioning of democracy which under the Constitution is no t possible unless the electoral process is free, fair and transparent and the allegations leveled, according to him, indicate that there was massive rigging.

[5] He, however, added that he is conscious and appreciate s the concern of this Court qua its jurisdic tion but only prays that the Election Petitions pending before various Tribunals qua constituencies subject matter of this CMA No.  in CRP No.  in Constitution Petition No.  3 application be directed to be decided expeditiously as notwithstanding the mandate of law that Election Petitions are to be decided within 120 days, those have not been decided.

[6] Mr. Hamid Khan referred to two cases in which despite direction of this Court the Tribunal did not decide the Election Petition and in yet another case the Tribunal did not comply with the order of the Election Commission wherein direction was issued to decide the application for comparison of thumb impressions within a certain period. 3.

[7] We would not like to comment at this stage on the merits of the issues raised. However, in the interest of justice, we direct the Secretary, Election Commission of Pakistan to submit parawise comments. A report shall also be called from Election Tribunal s Lahore and Multan to report about the non -compliance of the orders to which reference has been made in constituency numbers NA-125 (Lahore) and NA -154 (Lodhran).

[8] The report shall be submitted within a fortnight and the case shall be listed thereafter. CHIEF JUSTICE JUDGE JUDGE Islamabad, the 16th of December, 2013