Case No: C.M.A.8215/2016
Case Title: Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project
Subject: Writ Petition/Others
Judge: Mr. Justice Ejaz Afzal Khan
Judgment Date: 08-12-2017
Upload Date: 08-12-2017
Citations: 2018 SCMR 211
SC Citations: 2017 SCP 112
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/C.M.A._8215_2016.pdf

[1] judgmen t dated 19.08.2016 of Lahore High Court, Lahore, passed in Writ Petition No.39291 of 2015). National Engineering Services Pakistan [NESPAK] (Pvt) Limited Applicant/Appellant(s) (In CMA#8215 &  A ND Civil Appeal No .) Punjab Mass Transi t Authority through its Managing Director, Lahore Applicant/Appellant(s ) (In CMA# AND Civil Appeal No.) Lahore Development Authority through its Director General & another Applicant/Appellant(s) (In CMA# AND Civil Appeal No.) Province of Punjab through Chief Secretary, Lahore and others Applicant/Appellant(s) (In CMA# AND Civil Appeal No.) Civil Society Network through its Chairman Petitioner(s) (In Civil Petition No .3101 -L/16) VERSUS Kamil Khan Mumtaz & others Respondent(s) (In CMA#8215 &  A ND Civil Appeal No . ; in CMA# AND Civil Appeal No . ; in CMA# AND Civil Appeal No . ; and i n CMA# AND Civil Appeal No.) Province of Punjab through its Chief Secretary, Lahore Respondent(s) (In Civil Petition No .3101 -L/16) For the Appellant(s) : Mr.

[2] Shahid Hamid, Sr. ASC with Mr. Mahmood A. Sheikh, AOR assisted by Rabia Hassan, Advocate Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 2 Mr. Salman Hafeez, G.M. NESPAK (in CA.) : Mr. Makhd oom Ali Khan, Sr. ASC with Mr. Tariq Aziz, AOR a ssisted by Mr. Saad Hashmi, Advocate Mr. Sarmad Hani, Advocate Mr. Sabtain Fazal Haleem, M.D.

[3] PMA (in CA.) : Kh. Haris Ahmed, Sr. ASC with Mr. Mustafa Ramday, ASC Mr. Tariq Aziz, AOR assisted by Mr. Zaafir Khan, Advocate Mr. Ahmed Jamal, Advocate Israr Saeed, Chief Engineer, LDA Muhammad Rashid, Dir(Law), LDA Muhammad Hassan, Dy. Dir(E), LDA Hafiz Nisar Hussain, A. Dir(Law), LDA (in CA.) : Mr.

[4] Shakeel -ur-Rehman, AG, Punjab. Ms. Asma Hamid, Addl.AG Punjab Barrister Qasim Ali Chohan, AAG.Pb. Rao M. Yousaf Khan, AOR (Absent) Mr. Khurram Chughtai, Strategic Counsel (in CA ). For the Petitioner(s) : Mr. Azhar Siddique, ASC Mr. M. Ozair Chughtai, AOR (Absent) (in CP#3 101-L/16) For the Respondent(s) : Ms.

[5] Asma Jehangir, Sr. ASC with Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR Mr. Kamil Khan Mumtaz assisted by Mr. Noor Ejaz Chauhdry, Advocate Mr. Hamid Azim Leghari, Advocate Ms. Namra Gillani. Advocate Ms. Ayesha Alam Malik, Advocate Mr. S uleman Jahangir, Advocate (in CAs#2144 to ) Kh. Ahmad Hussain, ASC Mr. M. Ozair Chughtai, AOR (Absent) (No.2 in CAs#2144 to ) Mr.

[6] Azhar Siddique, ASC Mr. M. Ozair Chughtai, AOR (Absent) Assisted by Mr. Abdullah Malik, Adv. Mr. Hammyun Faiz Rasool, Advocate Mian Shabbir Ismail, Advocate Mr. M. Irfan Mukhtar, Advocate Ms. Parveen Mughal, Advocate Ms. Hifsa Mafia, Advocate (No.3 in CA#2144 AND Nos.3 -5 in CAs#2145, 2146&) Mr. Shakeel ur Rehman, AG Punjab Ms.

[7] Asma Hami d, Addl. AG Punjab Barrister Qasim Ali Chouhan, AAG, Pb (Government of the Punjab) Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 3 Syed Rafaqat Hussain Shah, AOR (No.17 in CAs#2144 & ; No.19 in CA# & No.16 in CA#) Dates of Hearing : 3rd to 6th, 10th to 14th & 17th April, 2017 JUDGMENT IJAZ UL AHSAN, J -.

[8] Having gone through the proposed judgment authored by my learned brother (Maqbool Baqar, J) , I do not find myself in agreement with the same. I, therefore, have recorded my own reasons and conclusions for accepting th e appeals and dismissing the petition which are as follows . 2. Through this judgment, we propose to decide Civil Appeal s No.2144 to 2147 of 201 6 and Civil Petition No.3101 -L of 2016 as common questions of law and fact have been raised against a judgment o f the Lahore High Court , Lahore . 3.

[9] These Appeals with leave of the Court have arisen out of a judgment of the Lahore High Court, Lahore, dated 19.08.2016 rendered in Writ Petition No.39291 of 2015 (Impugned Judgment). Through the Impugned Judgment, the Constitution Petition filed by the Respondents challenging various aspects of a mass transit project commonly known as “Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project (“OLMT Project ”) initiated by Government of the Punjab was partly allowed. 4.

[10] Briefly stated t he facts necessary for decision of these appeals and the petition are that Government of the Punjab initiated the OLMT Project in order to handle the chronic problem of acute traffic congestion and to meet the present and future transportation Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 4 requirements of the citizens of Lahore.

[11] The original feasibility study for a mass transit system for the city of Lahore was undertaken by a consulting Firm namely MVA Asia many years ago . The said study recommended a network made up of four lines in the following orde r of priority: - “i. Green Line : Ferozepur Road (Gajju Matta to Shahdara) 27km (completed). ii.

[12] Orange Line : Multan Road to GT Road (Ali Town to Dera Gujjran) 27.1 km (under construction) . iii. Blue Line: Jinnah Hall to Green Town 20 km ( In future). iv. Purple Line : Data Darbar to Airport 19 km ( in future). 5. The orange line (OLMT) as originally recommended was to consist of a 27.1 kilometers track (20.2 kilometers elevated and 6.9 kilometers underground) including 26 stations (20 elevated and 6 undergr ound) at an aggregate cost of US $ 2.00 billion exclusive of cost of land acquisition.

[13] The proposed project did not see the light of the day, presumably on account of its prohibitive cost. 6. The Government of Punjab wished to reduce the cost of the OLMT Project. It commissioned NESPAK , one of the best companies in the country in the area of infrastructure development , having vast local as well as international experience, to re -examine the feasibility study prepared by MVA Asia.

[14] An addendum to the said study was submitted by NESPAK in the year 2014. According to the proposal submitted by NESPAK, the length of the track as well as its alignment over and under the median of the road remained unchanged. However, in order to reduce the cost of the Project, th e underground portion was reduced to 1.7 kilometers which resulted in reduction of the aggregate cost from US $ 2.00 billion to US $ 1.6 billion.

[15] It was recommended that out of the total 27.1 kilometers Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 5 length of the route 1.7 kilometers would be a cut and cover segment and the remaining 25.4 kilometers would be an elevated viaduct. The viaduct of the OLMT Project consists of ‘U’ shaped girders (two separate channel shaped track ways of pre -stressed/concrete) resting on piers which are 30 meters apart.

[16] The viaduct system is supported by piles and a pile cap substructure system. The 1.85 meters thick pile cap consists of 6 piles of 1.2 meters diameter and 18 meters length. Piers of the viaduct are of 1.2 meters diameter. The height of the piers is approximate ly 13.5 meters. A 10 meter long transom rests over the top of each pier to support the ‘U’ shaped girders. 7.

[17] In the 1.7 kilometers cut and cover portion (underground section), the construction methodology is to erect barricades on either side of the ro ad, about 12 meters apart. Holes of a diameter of 0.76 meters are drilled in straight lines on either side of the road. Iron cages are lowered into the holes and these are filled with concrete.

[18] Thereafter, the area in -between is excavated to a depth of 3 m eters and a reinforced concrete roof 0.8 meters thick is constructed, joining the tunnel formed by the roof and the piles on either side with a clear height of 5.60 meters. Thereafter, a concrete slab of 0.6 meters is laid on the floor of the tunnel.

[19] All w all gaps (0.31 to 0.45 meters wide) in between the concrete piles are covered with water proofing and vibration dampening materials. 8. The system is designed to run B1 type trains (according to Chinese standards). Each train consists of 5 bo gies. The axel load of a B1 type bogie (loaded) is 140 kN and that of an empty one is 80 kN.

[20] The proposed OLMT Project has a total of 26 stations, 24 of Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 6 which are elevated while the remaining 2 are underground. The projected ridership is an average of 2,45 ,000 passengers per day. According to the appellants, more than 46% of the civil works corresponding with the total estimated cost of the Project had been completed till 30th of August, 2016 and another 30 to 40% of the civil works were likely to be comple ted in the next 6 to 8 months. 9.

[21] The main dispute raised before the High Court related to the impact of the proposed OLMT Project on various heritage sites and special premises as defined in the Antiquities Act, 1975 [the Act of 1975] and the Punjab Spe cial Premises (Preservation) Ordinance, 1985 [the Ordinance of 1985] , and the NOC’s/permission letters granted by the concerned departments to undertake the OLMT Project. 10.

[22] According to the Respondents, the following sites were covered under the Act of 1975 and the Ordinance of 1985, which were likely to be affected in view of their respective distances from various structures of the proposed Project and therefore required protection: - PROTECTED PREMISES (under the Act of 1975) i.

[23] Shalamar Garden (approxi mately 29 meters away from the train track) ii. Gulabi Bagh Gateway (21 meters away from the train track) iii. Buddu’s Tomb (18.1 meters away from the train track) iv. Chauburji (16 meters away from the train tack) v. Zaibunnisa’s Tomb (33 meters away from the train track ) SPECIAL PREMISES (under the Ordinance of 1985) i.

[24] Lakshmi Building (9.3 meters away from the train track) ii. General Post Office (GPO) (3.6 meters away from the train track) iii. Aiwan -e-Auqaf (Shah Chiragh) Building (20.1 meters away from the train track) iv. Suprem e Court, Lahore Registry Building (3.72 meters away from the train track) v. Saint Andrew’s Church (1.9 meters away from the train track) (Not declared as a “Special Premises” under the Ordinance of 1985). vi.

[25] Mauj Darya Shrine and the M osque (4.8 meters away fro m the train track). Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 7 11. It appears that any development scheme within a distance of 200 feet of an immovable antiquity, a protected site or special premise s require s sanction by the competent authority. The procedure for obtaining such sanction is provide d in Section 11 of the Ordinance of 1985 and Section 22 of the Act of 1975.

[26] For ease of reference, the relevant provisions are reproduced below: - “Section 11: Execution of development schemes and new constructions in proximity to Special Premises. — No development plan or scheme or new construction on, or within a distance of two hundred feet of a Special Premises shall be undertaken or executed except with the approval of the Government or a Committee.

[27] AND Section 22: Execution of development schemes and new constructions in proximity to immovable antiquity. – Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no development plan or scheme or new construction on, or within a distance of two hundred feet of, a protected immovabl e antiquity shall be undertaken or executed except with the approval of the Director General . 12.

[28] The Ordinance of 1985 and the Act of 1975 provide an adequate and effective mechanism and statutory framework to safeguard and protect heritage sites. These also identify the authorities required to enforce these laws. A buffer zone of 200 feet has been created around the heritage sites. However considering that it may not be possible to enforce the 200 feet buffer zone in all cases and under all circumstance s, the competent authorities have been empowered to permit development plans, schemes and construction (as the case may be).

[29] However , such permission can be granted by the competent authority after due application of mind to the facts, circumstances and na ture of each project and after satisfying itself that all necessary steps will be taken to ensure that the heritage site in question will not be destroyed, damaged or adversely affected.

[30] Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 8 13. The record indicates that the requisite applications alongwith relevant data were filed with the concerned Department s, which issued a ‘No Objection Certificate’ on 16.11.2015 for construction of the OLMT Project along the alignment of five heritage buildings protected under the Act of 1975.

[31] Similarly, another ‘No Objection Certificate’ was issued on 30.11.2015 in respect of the aforesaid special premises protected under the Ordinance of 1985. 14. The Respondents inter alia challenged issuance of the aforesaid NOCs. By order dated 28.01.2016, a Bench of the Lahore High Court suspended the said NOCs and restrained the appellants from carrying on any construction activity within 200 feet of the said buildings.

[32] Faced with this situation, the matter was referred to and re-examined by an Advisory Committee constituted in terms of the Act of 1975 under the Chairmanship of the Director General, Archaeology . It was decided to request the Lahore Development Authority (“LDA”) to engage an independent structural engineer to evaluate the effect of OLMT Project on the aforesaid buil dings during construction and operational phases.

[33] The Committee also decided to engage the services of Dr. Ayesha Pamela Rogers to conduct a Heritage Impact Assessment [HIA] of the OLMT Project. 15. Pursuant to the above decision, Dr. Engr. Javed Uppal was appointed as the independent structural engineer for evaluati ng the effect of the Project on the aforesaid buildings during the construction and operation phases of the Project .

[34] He submitted his assessment report on 24.02.2016. Likewise, Dr. Rogers subm itted her report on 05.03.2016. The said reports as well as other material, information and data were examined by the Committee. In light of Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 9 the said examination of data , reports, recommendations and findings new NOCs/permissions were issu ed by the compete nt authorities , which were stated to be in continuation of the earlier permissions .

[35] These incorporated stringent conditions and requirements to be fulfilled during various phases of the Project . These were presented before the Bench of the High Court heari ng the matter s. However, these permissions were also rejected by the Bench holding that the said experts were neither independent nor impartial in view of the fact that they had allegedly undertaken some work at some stage for Government of the Punjab or had been associated, in a professional capacity with the said Government in the past.

[36] The Constitution Petition was ultimately accepted in the terms reproduced below :- “i) The original NOCs dated 16.11.2015, 30.11.2015 and all revised NOCs dated 06.05.2016 and all addendum NOCs dated 20.5.2016 under the Act of 1975 and Ordinance of 1985 are set aside being issued without lawful authority and of no legal effect.

[37] Consequently, the respondents shall not carry out any construction within distance of 200 feet of protected immovable antiquity and special premises mentioned in para 24 of this judgment. ii) The Director General Archaeology is directed to engage independent consultants consisting of panel of experts of international status preferably in consultatio n with UNESCO to carry out fresh independent study/report regarding protected immovable antiquities and special premises. iii) The request for permission under Section 22 of the Act of 1975 and under Section 11 of the Ordinance of 1985 will be considered afresh by the competent authorities in the light of study/report by independent experts of international status referred above. iv) To structure the discretion of competent authorities for future permissions under Section 22 of the Act of 1975 and Section 11 of the Ordinance of 1985, the Government is directed to frame rules under Section 37 Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 10 of the Act of 1975 and Section 16 of the Ordinance of 1985. v) This petition to the extent of Environmental Approvals dated 09.7.2015 and 09.5.2016 is dismissed being not maintainable.

[38] However, the recommendations of Advisory Committee on environment (constituted under section 5(6) of the Act of 1997) in its report dated 07.5.2016 will be implemented in letter and spirit by the authorities concerned ”. 16. When the ma tter came up for hearing before this Court, after a preliminary hearing, it was clear to us that the bone of contention between the parties was the credibility and technical reliability of the original reports submitted by NESPAK.

[39] In passing, doubts were a lso raised about the reports filed by Dr. Uppal and Dr. Rogers, more so, on their impartiality rather than the merit and technical soundness of their respective reports. It was therefore clear and obvious to us that the concerns of the Respondents i.e. the accuracy and technical soundness of the report of NESPAK and credibility of the experts and their reports needed to be verified and counter checked by sending the reports and all relevant technical material and information to a n independent expert to seek his opinion on the contents of the report .

[40] These had been questioned by the Respondents and discarded by the High Court . In our view the opinion of an independent expert could enable us to resolve this controversy. 17. On our query, the learned counsel for the Respondents quite readily and learned counsel for the Appellants after some hesitation agreed to such course of action.

[41] We therefore directed both parties to propose names of at least three independent experts out of whom we could appoint one to un dertake this exercise. Both Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 11 parties submitted names of different experts . In order to ensure that fairness and impartiality was maintained , we decided to nominate two experts, one out of the three proposed by each side.

[42] Accordingly , we nominated Mr. Robin Cunningham, a Professor in the Department of Archaeology , University of Durham, United Kingdom , proposed by the Respondents and M/s TYPSA – Asian Consulting Engineers (Pvt) Ltd. JV ( “TYPSA ”) proposed by the appellants to undertake an exercise of re -verific ation and provide us their opinion on various technical aspects of the report of NESPAK .

[43] The Government of the Punjab was directed to bear all expenses for both experts and parties were directed to provide all documentation, material, data and information that the experts may possibly require for making their independent assessment/re -verification of the reports submitted by NESPAK. Vide our order dated 14.10.2016 the experts were given 30 days time to finalize their reports and submit the same before this Court.

[44] The reports were filed with some delay which occurred on account of logistical reasons but is of no relevance at this stage . The parties were called upon to submit their objections. The parties filed their objections whereafter arguments on the obje ctions as well as the main appeals were heard by us . 18.

[45] Despite the fact that the controversy had been narrowed down to re -verification of credibility of the NESPAK reports dated July, 2015 and February, 2016, in the context of Act of 1975 and the Ordin ance of 1985, detailed arguments on all aspects of the case were addressed by the parties . Learned counsel for the appellants namely Mr.

[46] Shahid Hamid, Sr.ASC (in Civil Appeal No.2144 of 2016) ; Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, Sr.ASC (in Civil Appeal No.2145 of 2016) ; Kh. Haris Ahmed, Sr.ASC (in Civil Appeal No.2146 of 2016) ; Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 12 and Mr. Shakeel -ur-Rehman, Advocate General Punjab (in Civil Appeal No.2147 of 2017) addressed detailed arguments in support of their respective appeals .

[47] They not only defended the reports submit ted by NESPAK in July, 2015 and February, 2016 but also reinforced their arguments by the contents of the report submitted by M/s TYPSA - Asia which according to them fully supported, re - verified and confirmed the accuracy and credibility of the reports earlier submitted by the NESPAK.

[48] They also pointed out that the report of Professor Robin Cunningham was quite general in nature and dealt more with the legal interpretation of the provisions of the Act of 1975 and the Ordinance of 1985 . It did not advert to the technical aspects of the reports of NESPAK, Dr. Uppal and Dr. Rogers and was therefore not of much help with reference to the credibility of the reports which were the subject matter of the controversy before this Court. 19.

[49] Learned counsel for the R espondents, including Mrs. Asma Jahangir and Kh. Ahmad Hussain, ASCs on the other hand made half-hearted attempt s to challenge the credibility of the reports of M/s TYPSA – Asia as well as NESPAK but unfortunately, without submitting any technical data or information to counter , discredit or dislodge the conclusions and opinions recorded in the said reports .

[50] However, owing to the technical nature of the reports and in the absence of any counter report, data or information they could not come up with anythin g convincing that could persuade us to discard the said reports. As a last resort, t hey also relied upon the expertise of Mr. Kamil Khan Mumtaz, who was one of petitioners before the High Court.

[51] Mr. Mumtaz gave us a presentation on multimedia and also prov ided hard copies of his presentation for our assistance . We Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 13 have carefully examined the material provided by him . We were also shown real time footage made with the help of Drone mounted cameras on multi media and computer simulations of the OLMT Project on projection screens installed in the Court Room .

[52] In addition , enlarged recent photographs of the Project and the location and condition of the protected sites were also filed depicting various stages of work in progress at various locations with the objec t of giving us a clear understanding of the situation on the ground and contextualizing the arguments submitted by both sides. 20.

[53] We also granted permission to Mr. Mumtaz to address us. He explained to us that the effect of vibration s (expected to emana te during the construction phase of the Project and operation of the train) on monuments depended on the following factors: - i) Magnitude of vibration produced by a particular action; ii) Distance between vibration source and the vibration receiver; iii) The condition of the monument; and iv) The nature of mediums through which it travels to the receiver (soil and concrete etc). 21.

[54] His presentation while useful in an academic sense was helpful in understanding the general concepts but did not, in our opinion, directly address the issue before us. Further, it did not , in any material way, challenge or displace the opinions and conclusions of NESPAK, Dr. Uppal, Dr. Rogers or TYPSA. 22.

[55] We have considered the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties and carefully examined the various documents and reports placed on the record. It appears that a Project of this nature involves emanation and transmission of potentially harmful vibrations for old buildings and structures at two stages i.e. the construct ion phase and the operational phase.

[56] At the Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 14 construction stage, operation of heavy construction machinery, particularly, drills, pile drivers, excavators pavement breakers and other impact devices create seismic waves that radiate along the surface of the earth and downward into the earth. These vibrations in excess of certain levels have the potential to cause damage to a building as well as its foundation.

[57] The manner in which a particular building will respond to such vibration depends on many factors including the type of soil on which the building is founded, the age, type and state of foundation of the building, the mass and stiffness of main structural elements of the building, the condition of the building as a whole and the level and frequency of its maintenance.

[58] Assessment of susceptibility to vibration has to be taken into account while setting vibration limits. The operational phase covers all parameters that relate to the operation of trains. Factors such as speed, the condition of suspension syst em installed on the trains , the condition of the wheels, the quality, material and condition of the rails on which the train will operate and the measures taken to absorb/reduce transmission of vibration to surrounding areas are some of the factors to be k ept in mind. 23.

[59] The reports submitted by NESPAK, Dr. Uppal and Dr. Rogers suggested that there was no real danger to the protected or special premises which were situated in the vicinity of the Project. However, to be on the safe side they suggested add itional remedial and protective safeguards and measures. These were duly incorporated in the NOCs and permission letters issued by the Director General, Archaeology.

[60] However, these were rejected by the High Court. In order to determine the validity of the reports and to verify accuracy of the same with the consent of the pa rties, the same Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 15 were sent to independent experts for their objective opinion. The report submitted by TYPSA was found by us to be most relevant .

[61] It directly addressed the concerns of the Respondents. Relevant parts of the said report are summarized below: - a) The description of the viaduct is complete and comprehensive as a general description. b) A pile of 13.5 m seems to have been simulated and in the SAP model, which does not include the viaduct desk, the POT bearings and the upper part with the platform, track and other concrete elements such as lateral parapets, the pile is 8m in height approximately.

[62] Thus, the modeled pile is significantly smaller than the real ones in any case and since the density of the concrete has not been corrected/adjusted to compensate the geometry difference, the modeled pile is also significantly lighter than the real ones. This assumption gives higher vibration on results than to be anticipated and is con sidered to be a conservative approach adopted in the report by NESPAK . c) POT bearings are commonly used between viaducts piers and desks and introduce a resonance frequency.

[63] These POT bearings are designed to bring a relatively low resonance frequency. T hus, their influence would lead to lower vibration levels. The POT bearings have not been modeled, it can safely be said that more conservative and safe parameters have been used and the vibration values given in NESPAK reports are higher than the expected values during operation of the trains . d) The description of the tunnel is complete and comprehensive. e) The description of the rolling stock is comprehensive, although the speed data is missing in the report.

[64] It is very relevant parameter, which affect s directly the dynamic loads on the track. It has further been indicated that the modeled speed is 70 km/h as in the Xia paper. It is considered correct, taking into account the maximum speed is 80 km/h and the average commercial speed is 34.6 km/h. It is a conservative assumption, since stations are close by and thus, speed is reduced and vibrations will be lower.

[65] FEA MODEL : Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 16 The description of the FEA model is comprehensive. a) The viaduct model consists of pier, pile cap, the piles and surrounding soi l. The viaduct desk and the track affect the total mass whereas the track usually includes vibration damping elements, mainly the fastening system.

[66] NESPAK models include indirectly these elements through the use of the Xia force and thus, the model will be overestimating the real vibrations, which shows a conservative but safe model has been adopted . b) The backup material of the underground part indicates that vibration isolators/dampers will be provided which will lead to lower levels of vibration.

[67] Thus, vibration values higher than what would be expected are reported and the approach is safe . c) A 2D model has been used. It is assumed that the geometry is constant and infinite in the longitudinal direction. It is correct in the case of the viaduct, but in a 2D model of a viaduct, the properties of all the modeled materials generally need to be adjusted: the ground or the rails can be considered infinite in the longitudinal direction but not the piers of the viaduct and thus, their properties (mass and stif fness) need to be adjusted.

[68] This seems to have been done through the calibration with a 3D model, which is acceptable and safe . d) A module of elasticity of 2000 MPa is indicated for the ground and around 20.000 MPa for the pile concrete. This is a conserv ative approach that has given higher values of vibration in the report than those expected during operation . e) Vertical force at the top of pier is determined from the dynamic train model of Xia.

[69] The result is a load history whose maximum value is 660 kN approximately, which is a high value for a Metro vehicle. However, this force is discretized every 0.25 s and thus, it corresponds to a sample frequency of 4 Hz, which only allows analyzing very low frequencies. f) These calculations are quasi static and v alid for structural issues.

[70] The viaduct and the tunnel seem to be modeled without any node and the ground is with 4 nodes shell elements with a 1x1 m mesh size in the case of the tunnel and 2x2 m in the case of viaduct. This mesh size allows getting reliab le results which would be acceptable. g) As additional safety measures NESPAK indicates that track details will be provided by the Chinese contractor Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 17 including dampers, a 600 mm thick flexible sand cushion material under the bottom slab supporting track, a nd isolating cork material behind the wall in addition to the waterproofing layer.

[71] These mitigation measures have not been used in the FEA analysis and act as a further cushion/reserve capacity as safeguard against the actual vibration expected at the heri tage and special premises buildings . h) We also fully agree with the suggestion that during the construction and at the commissioning time, noise and vibrations should be measured/monitored to make sure that the vibration and noise remain within the accept able limits .

[72] VIBRATION EFFECTS ON HERITAGE BUILDINGS : The vibration levels have been calculated according to the methodology analyzed before and the results are assessed according to the DIN 4150 -3; 1999 and DECC’s standards. German standards have been u sed by NESPAK for comparison which are one of the most stringent available standards .

[73] VIBRATION EFFECTS OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES : a) The vibration effects of the construction equipment are estimated based on the CALTRAN’s method. This seems to be adequa te and it can be assumed that the maximum allowable values are the same as analyzed before for the operation phase according to the DIN 4150 -3 standard.

[74] The reports state that the vibration levels at underground critical sites are within the allowable limi ts, which is correct . b) The vibration levels associated separately to each equipment have also been received. This can always be controlled at site by not allowing machines to work simultaneously near the heritage sites.

[75] CONCLUSIONS : The NESPAK reports seem to be very serious and complete from structural point of view. It is relevant with respect to safety and stability of buildings both during the construction stage and under train operation. The approach adopted by NESPAK is conservative. The NESPAK re ports rightly conclude that the levels obtained by calculation will be within the permissible limits and there will be no adverse effect on any of these sites.

[76] It is concluded that the reports of NESPAK are compliant with international codes and standards and the subject studies are comprehensive and complete with reference to the subject and the results are correct and within acceptable limits. Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 18 24. We are not experts in the fields of architectural, structural or mechanical engineering, and do not claim an y expertise in the field of vibration science s.

[77] We therefore have to rely upon the reports and opinions of the experts submitted before us . These are prima facie credible owing to the fact that they have been confirmed and reconfirmed by independent expert s and have by far remained un-rebutted. 25. During the course of arguments and on perusal of the reports, the aspect of visual impairment of heritage sites has also been highlighted.

[78] It has been pointed out that in addition to physical impairment of prote cted or special premise s, the aspect of visual impairment of such premises also needs to be factored in. Visual impairment occurs when the proposed development/installation or structure blocks the view of the premises or distracts an onlooker from apprecia ting the intrinsic beauty of such premises /structure .

[79] It has been argued that in the case of some of the sites, which are subject matter of these proceedings, there is a possibility of visual impairment that may have a negative impact on the heritage sites which are sought to be protected. We would, therefore, keep the said factor in mind during the course of our discussion. 26.

[80] We would, however, confine ourselves to the examination of material as well as dealing with the arguments advanced by the learne d counsels for the parties regarding three major aspects of the case namely , the construction phase, the operational phase and the aspect of visual impairment in the light of opinion s of experts in their respective fields .

[81] Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 19 27. As far as the construction p hase of the OLMT Project is concerned, the learned counsel for the appellants have pointed out that other than the 11 sites regarding which a restraining order had been issued by the High Court, a major part of the construction work on the Project has already been completed.

[82] This statement has not seriously been contested by the Respondents. This is also evident from the photographs placed on record and the real time footage seen by us. Further, there is no evidence of any damage caused to any building in t he vicinity of the line on account of the construction work done so far.

[83] We have been informed that 8250 holes were to be excavated/drilled along the 25.4 kilometers elevated track. Out of these 8028 holes have already been drilled / excavated / capped/ filled. A large number of holes falling within 200 feet of the monuments/premises (subject matter of these appeals) had also been drilled before the High Court issued a restraining order.

[84] These include 74 out of 164 holes within 200 feet of Shalamar Garden; 39 out of 39 within 200 feet of Gulabi Bagh; 30 out of 30 within 200 feet of Buddu’s Tomb; 19 out of 48 within 200 feet of Lakshmi Mansion; 43 out of 48 within 200 feet of Chauburji; and 10 out of 45 holes within 200 feet of Zaibunnisa’s Tomb. 28.

[85] The lea rned Advocate General, Punjab, has categorically stated that no damage of any nature has been caused to any building on either side of 25.4 kilometers elevated track including the 5 protected and one special premises, as a result of the completed excavatio n/ drilling/ filling/capping work. This categoric statement has neither been contested nor denied by the Respondent at any stage.

[86] Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 20 29. With regard to the cut and cover portion of the track, we have been informed that 3693 holes are to be excavated/drilled along the 1.7 kilometers underground track. Each of these holes ha s a diameter of 0.76 meters i.e. substantially less than 1.20 meters diameter of the holes in the elevated portion.

[87] All the excavations are to be undertaken on the road surface i.e. inside the footpaths on either side of the road using highly sophisticated drilling equipment that creates minimal vibration . 1862 holes have already been drilled/ excavated/ filled/concretized and tunnels excavated on either end of the 1.7 kilometers cut and cov er length.

[88] No damage has so far been caused or reported to any building or structure on either side of the roads on which these 1862 piles have been completed and tunnels excavated/capped. This statement of the learned Advocate General, Punjab too has rema ined unrebutted. 30. From the material placed before us, which is based on verified data (not seriously contested by the Respondents), it is clear and obvious that so far despite full fledged construction activity no damage has been caused to any buildin g / premises along the entire route of the OLMT Project.

[89] The Respondents did produce some photographs showing cracks in the wall of GPO and displacement of some bricks at Chauburji. However, on closer examination and seeking further information from the co ncerned quarters, it transpired that such damage had occurred on account of age of the building, normal wear and tear because of natural causes , environmental factors, seismic activity and earthquakes, etc which had occurred in the past , much before commen cement of the OLMT Project .

[90] These had no nexus or connection with the construction activity relating to the said Project. Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 21 31. It may be appreciated that most of the protected and special premises are located in the midst of heavily populated areas surrou nded by dense , haphazard, unplanned and unregulated, commercial and residential construction .

[91] Roads have been constructed in close proximity to these sites on which heavy vehicular traffic including heav ily loaded trucks, tr ailers , buses and other transpo rt vehicles ply throughout the year round the clock. This activity has gone on for decades. Such traffic creates much higher levels of vibration compared to the level of vibrations expected to be created during the construction and operational phases of the OLMT Project.

[92] However, no significant damage to any of the heritage sites has been attributed to vibrations emanating from heavy vehicular traffic on these roads . 32. It is common knowledge that ancient buildings suffer damage and decay on account of p assage of time , elements of nature, extremities of weather, environmental factors, seismic activity and earthquakes, etc.

[93] These cannot be preserved indefinitely unless serious and planned effort is made to constantly repair, maintain , renovate , restore and reconstruct the damaged portions. It is indeed unfortunate that very little serious effort has so far been made to implement and enforce measures to protect, preserve, repair and restore such sites.

[94] The matter came to fore and was highlighted once constru ction work on the OLMT Project commenced. 33. We are constrained to observe that serious efforts n eed to be made by the concerned departments and agencies to preserve, conserve, restore and protect heritage sites and where Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 22 necessary , renovate , not only t he sites which are the subject matter of these proceedings but all other sites of historic significance on a continual basis .

[95] This can be done by employing experts in their respective fields and allocating the requisite funds generously to finance such pro jects on long term basis. In this regard, we would issue appropriate direction s to the concerned authorities in the later part of this judgment. Suffice it to say at this stage that , on our query , the learned Advocate General, Punjab under instructions , gave an undertaking that a sum of Rupees One Hundred Million would immediately be allocated to the Archaeology Department for the upkeep/maintenance and renovation of the sites which are subject matter of the present litigation. 34.

[96] Perusal of the reports s ubmitted by NESPAK and M/s TYPSA – Asia which uses German “DIN” and US “Caltran” standards as benchmarks of acceptable levels of vibrations for old buildings / monuments / structures , with reference to the levels of vibration expected to be generated durin g the construction as well as operational phases of the OLMT Project indicates that the project ed vibration levels expected to emanate during the construction and operation phases would remain within internationally acceptable limits.

[97] These levels, accordi ng to expert opinions placed before us are highly unlikely to cause any damage or deterioration to the protected and special premises. However, in our view a cautious approach has to be adopted . It has been stated that different pieces of equipment produce different levels of vibration and if various machines are used simultaneously during the construction phase , the aggregate levels of vibration may exceed acceptable limits.

[98] We have specifically confronted the learned Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 23 counsel for the Respondents as well as the learned Advocate General, Punjab with this observation of the experts. They have, on instructions and in consultation with their engineering experts (some of whom were present in Court) , categorically stated that it would be ensured that one piece of equipment is used at any given time while undertaking work in the vicinity of the protected and special premises in question.

[99] If more than one item of equipment is required to be used, the aggregate levels of vibration shall not be allowed to exceed the acc eptable limits as provided in the afore -noted international standards. 35. It has also been undertaken that technical experts shall constantly be present at the sites when work is undertaken in the vicinity of protected and special premises and all neces sary equipment for the purpose of monitoring the levels of vibration, shall be made available to them.

[100] It has further been undertaken that if the experts point out any possibility or likelihood of vibration levels exceeding acceptable limits, or any damage being caused to an y protected or special premises, on account of the construction activity, work shall immediately be stopped till such time that all necessary remedial measures have been taken to the satisfaction of the experts to ensure that vibration l evels remain within permissible limits, and no such damage is caused to any protected or special premises on this score.

[101] Further, work shall commence only after experts have given written clearance for resumption. In this view of the matter, we have no rea son to disbelieve or doubt the intention of the appellants and their bona fides to undertake work on the Project without taking undue risk of causing damage or deterioration to a protected or special premises.

[102] Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 24 36. The learned counsel for the Respondents w ere repeatedly asked to place on record any material showing that the reports of NESPAK, Dr. Uppal or TYPSA were incorrect, erroneous or unworthy of reliance. However, other than making generalized submissions based on apprehensions they were unable to pla ce any credible material o n record to discredit the said reports.

[103] We notice that the High Court also discarded two of these reports without examining their veracity or merit on the basis of a misconceived and imaginary notion of bias and partiality on the part of NESPAK , Dr. Uppal and Dr. Rogers. We are at a loss to understand how the reports of credible professionals could so lightly be discarded and brushed aside , without an in -depth comparative analysis with independent technical reports to be submitted by the Respondents , which were never submitted .

[104] Simply on the allegation that NESPAK, Dr. Uppal and Dr. Rogers had undertaken projects for the Respondents in the past and were therefore partial and biased , the High Court not only discarded the reports casting unjustified doubts about the independence and integrity of the experts but also proceeded to throw out conditional permission letters issued by authorities competent under the law to do so after due deliberation and application of mind to all relevant material.

[105] Likewise, the High Court tossed out the revised conditional permission letters issued by the Director General, Archaeology committee set up for the said purpose who w ere competent to do so, in an offhand , ungracious and dismissive manner without assigning any valid justification and legally sustainable reasoning.

[106] It lost sight of the fact that the revised permission letters were issued after examination of all technical data and reports of experts and imposed stringent conditions and Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 25 incorporated adequate safeguards to address most of the genuine concerns of the Respondents.

[107] Unfortunately, these aspects were not even considered let alone discussed and deliberated upon . We are unable to understand why and how the High Court could discard the opinion s of experts and persons mandated by law to take decisions based on such opinions , arrogate such powers to itself and proceed to substitute unchallenged and unrebutted technical opinions of experts with those of its own despite complete lack of training an d expertise in the field s of structural engineering and vibration sciences .

[108] In our opinion, the High Court e rred in law and quite obviously exceeded its jurisdiction in doing so, without assigning valid, cogent, sound and legally sustainable reasons. We ar e therefore , unfortunately , unable to agree with or uphold the findings of the learned High Court in this regard. 37.

[109] As far as the operational phase of the Project is concerned, even the learned counsel for the Respondents have candidly conceded that the vibration levels would be considerably lower than those expected during the operational phase. The experts have also opined that there is hardly any foreseeable danger of occurrence of any damage to the protected or special premises on account of operatio n of the trains in question , provided all necessary remedial and mitigating measures suggested by them are adopted and put in place .

[110] We have further been informed that although the maximum design speed of the train is 80 kilometers per hour, the train woul d actually operate at an average speed of 34.8 kilometers per hour which would also vary (on the lower side) on account of location of 28 stations (more or less on e station every one kilometer) on the route of the OLMT Project covering a distance of 27.1 Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 26 kilometers.

[111] However, as a matter of abundant caution , we direct and the appellants have undertaken to operate the train on experimental basis for at least two weeks to test, monitor and ensure that vibrations occurring on account of operation of the trains are well within acceptable limits. It has also been undertaken that in case levels of vibration s emanating from running of the trains exceed acceptable limits, operations shall immediately be discontinued and all necessary remedial measures will be taken t o ensure that vibrations are brought down to acceptable limits.

[112] Under no circumstances shall the train be operated where its operation may possibly cause damage to the protected or special premises . In this context, we also direct that sophisticated and st ate of the art vibration measuring and monitoring equipment be installed at suitable places in or around the protected and special premises to constantly monitor the levels of vibration created by operation of the train.

[113] Further, the Archaeology Department shall constitute special teams consisting of qualified experts which will periodically inspect all protected and special premises to detect any damage or deterioration occurring at the sites for any reason . They shall maintain proper records and logbooks for the said purpose.

[114] They shall bring all necessary facts relating to the condition of the antiquities and special premises to the notice of the Director General, Archaeology who will take all steps necessary to ensure safety and long term preservation of the buildings and structures in question . 38. We have also been informed that all requisite information and data relating to the operational phase was verified through state of the art systems using XIA.

[115] H. Zang methodology Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 27 and a lignment analysis was co nducted by Finite Element Analysis (FEA) . The result s which w ere based on actual verified data show that the vibration levels likely to occur at the operational stage would remain well below internationally acceptable limits.

[116] Despite supportive opinions of experts and as a matter of abundant caution, we also direct that the citizens and community may also be involved in the monitoring process; a hotline may be established , telephone number whereof shall be prominently displayed in public areas around all an tiquities and special premises.

[117] Tourists, visitors and members of the community should be encouraged to report any damage or deterioration observed in the protected or special premises for any reason to the competent authorities. If any such information is received, the same shall be investigated by a team of experts appointed by the Director General, Archaeology within 15 days of such information being reported.

[118] The team shall suggest ways and means to repair/restore any damage or deterioration that may ha ve occurred to any antiquity or protected premises for any reason. On recommendations being received, the Archaeology Department shall commence repair/renovation work without any delay and the requisite funds shall be made available by the concerned quarte rs within 30 days of a request being made . 39.

[119] As far as the question of visual impairment is concerned, we note that all protected and special premises are located in heavily populated areas of the city . Unplanned localities and townships have sprung up around and in close proximity to such buildings. Construction has been undertaken haphazardly and without any sort of planning or regulation which has seriously compromised the visual integrity of most of the protected and special Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 28 premises.

[120] The report sub mitted by Dr. Rogers suggest s remedial measures. These appear to be effective and practical and must be implemented. I n a later part of this judgment, we would pass appropriate directions in this regard. 40. We have also been informed that a buffer Zone was proposed around Shalamar Garden many years ago.

[121] It was recommended that encroachments in the Zone be removed and it be converted into a green area with proper landscaping to restore and enhance the grandeur, glory and beauty of the Garden. The said recommendations have been lying in cold storage and become victims of procrastination and red tapism.

[122] We direct that positive steps may be taken to implement the said recommendations as far as practicable within a reasonable time frame . 41. The Respondent s have primarily raised objections relating to the visual impairment of two sites namely Shalamar Garden and Chauburji. As far as Chauburji is concerned, we have found that some visual impairment many occur because of the alignment of the viaduct which pas ses at a short distance from the structure.

[123] We have carefully examined the possibility of directing alteration of the alignment of the viaduct or directing that the said portion be constructed underground. However, we have been informed by experts (which i nformation has not been rebutted) that realignment is not possible for a host of technical reasons in addition to the fact that the area is densely populated with private properties.

[124] Any realignment would entail considerable human cost in the form of large scale cause displacement of families , in addition to prohibitive increase in the cost of the Project. The idea of an underground Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 29 tunnel though attractive at first glance is fraught with technical difficulties including the fact that underground streams ca rrying waste water from various localities of Lahore pass under the proposed alignment .

[125] It would therefore be almost impossible to construct an underground tunnel with the available technical and financial resources . There is no other feasible option excep t to rely on remedial and mitigating measures suggested by Dr. Rogers in her report. We accordingly order that all such measures and steps recommended by her be implemented in letter and spirit. 42.

[126] As far as the visual impairment of Shalamar Garden is concerned, we note that there is no significant visual impairment of the said location . This is in view of the fact that the Garden is surrounded by clusters of residential and commercial buildings of all shapes and sizes as well as busy roads. A densely po pulated township has developed on three sides of the Garden.

[127] A busy dual carriage way (GT Road) runs on the fourth side. However, fortunately the Garden has high walls around it. A person standing in the street cannot see inside the Garden from the street level. As such, there is no question of any visual impairment. A person walking in the Garden may possibly be able to see glimpses of the viaduct or the train from certain points.

[128] This aspect does not stricto sensu constitute visual impairment. However, e ven this issue can adequately and effectively be addressed by adopting remedial and mitigating measures recommended by experts. 43. The learned counsel for the Respondents have vehemently argued that the viaduct passes over/at a very close distance from the Hydraulic Tank of Shalamar Garden which is Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 30 situated outside the Garden.

[129] We have carefully gone through the photographs as well as the structural sketches submitted by both parties. We find that the hydraulic tank is in a state of total disrepair and ha s undergone considerable deterioration . We have been assured that there is no likelihood of any further damage to the said hydraulic tank by reason of construction of some piers supporting the viaduct , close to it.

[130] We would however direct the Archaeology Department as well as the Government of Punjab to ensure that the hydraulic tank is repaired/restored as far as possible to its original position . Such further steps may also be taken , as may be necessary, so that further deterioration or damage is not caus ed to the structure of hydraulic tanks. 44.

[131] In addition to Shalamar Garden, we notice that the elevated track of OLMT passes near some other sites which are subject matter of these proceedings . All these sites exist on thoroughfares and are surrounded (at in some cases hidden) by heavy urban development. None of these sites ha s a visual landscape integrity.

[132] Therefore, the visual impact of construction of the elevated track will be of no material consequence for the purpose of visual landscape obstruction of such sites . 45. The learned counsel for the Respondents were vehement in their assertion that UNESCO had threatened to remove Shalamar Garden from the list of World Heritage sites, unless work on the OLMT Project was immediately stopped.

[133] However, the decisions adopted in the 41st Committee Meeting which are available on the website of UNESCO do not support the claim of learned counsel for the Respondents. The emphasis of UNESCO World Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 31 Heritage Committee appears to be on control and monitoring of urban e ncroachments and to discuss measures relating to management and protection arrangements of the Garden.

[134] It has nowhere been stated that the Garden will be removed from the list of World Heritage sites if the Project goes ahead. However , considering that Shalamar Garden features in the list of world heritage sites, we direct that every possible effort be made to meet the re commendations of UNESCO by way of taking mitigating and remedial measures.

[135] Further, the Appellants in collaboration with UNESCO shall adop t all practicable measures to control and monitor urban encroachments and explore the possibility of creating a buffer zone by coordinating efforts of all concerned departments . 46. It has also been pointed out to us that the OLMT Project will actually improve accessibility to antiquities and special premises for local as well as international tourists .

[136] This is in view of the fact that the roads leading to such sites are highly congested making the commute from most parts of the city, time consuming, cum bersome and difficult. Further, the views from elevated vantage point s are likely to attract and encourage tourists to visit the sites and appreciate their historic value. 47.

[137] We have been informed that Lahore is one of the few cities in the world with po pulation in excess of 10 million which do not have a mass transit train system. London developed its first metro system in 1843. More than 150 cities of various sizes all over the world have had rapid transit train system s for decades.

[138] In sco res of cities in Asia, Africa and Latin America , such systems are currently under construction. The citizens of Lahore also deserve an Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 32 efficient, affordable and environmentally friendly mass transit system to cater for the ir current and future transportation needs.

[139] Even the Respondents admit that a mass transit system is the only viable solution to address the issue of traffic congestion on the roads and absence of adequate and affordable transport facilities for the rapidly increasing population of Lahore . It has been s ubmitted by th e Respondents that they do not o ppose the Project.

[140] Their objection is limited to the mode and manner in which it is being implemented near some of the sites mentioned above. 48. All over the world, where heritage sites are located within cities, the development of the cities is planned in a manner so as to maintain a balance between infrastructural development while retaining /preserving and maintaining the heritage sites.

[141] This is often a difficult balance to maintain, but a number of citie s all over the world have successfully managed to do so. London, Rome, Istanbul, Beijing, Delhi, Jaipur, etc are but a few examples. We have no reason to believe that this cannot be done in Lahore. There can be no two views about the importance of our hist orical and heritage sites and the need to preserve and protect them and to safely pass them on to the future generations.

[142] But the same need not be at the cost of depriving the citizens of Lahore of an efficient, reliable, dependable and modern mass transit system and to force them to live with an outdated, overstrained, inefficient and expensive system which in addition to all its faults is badly polluting the city pushing air pollution to levels , many times the safe and internationally acceptable limits.

[143] P reservation and development are not mutually exclusive and can go side by side complementing each other as has successfully been accomplished in many cities of the world. All it Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 33 requires is proper planning and efficient implementation. We, therefore, direc t the Government of the Punjab to ensure that every possible effort is made to create and maintain such balance.

[144] Further, we direct that in future if any project of this nature is to be undertaken, the Project must be widely publicized through the print and electronic media at least six months prior to the proposed date of commencement . Public hearing s should be held and the citizens must be allowed to express their views .

[145] All requisite permissions/approvals, licenses and NOCs etc must be obtained from the concerned departments/agencies before actual work on the Project is commenced so that all those who wish to raise objections have adequate time and sufficient information to approach the competent fora in case they have genuine objections . 49.

[146] We have repeatedly asked the learned counsels for the Respondents, if they have an alternat ive workable plan. The only suggestions they could come up with involved either realignment of the route or constructing the line underground for the portion where it passes near the sites in question. This would entail an underground portion of about 6.9 kilometers and an astronomical increase in the cost of the Project.

[147] Both proposals are neither financially feasible nor practically workable and would require re - planning and realign ment of the rout es and revision of the entire mass transit policy for Lahore which envisages a mass transit project described above which ha s taken years of planning, data collection and designing.

[148] The proposals put forth by the Respondents would disrupt and throw into disarray the entire master plan which has been prepared by international experts in the fi eld of mass transit projects a part of which ( Green Line ) has already been completed Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 34 and is presently operational.

[149] No valid reason has been ple aded that may persuade us to take such drastic an action. In the facts and circumstances of the present case , it was even otherwise beyond the jurisdictional domain of the High Court in exercise of its powers under Article 199 of the Constitution of Islami c Republic of Pakistan, 1973 to delve into highly technical and purely policy issues which were better left to be dealt with by experts having relevant knowledge, training and expertise in their respective fields and the competent authorities authorized an d empowered by law to do so.

[150] Reference may usefully be made to Dossani Travels Pvt. Ltd. v. Travels Shop Pvt. Ltd (PLD 2014 Supreme Court 1). 50. We have carefully gone through the reports submitted by NESPAK, Dr. Uppal, Dr. Rogers, M/s TYPSA –Asia and Dr . Cunningham and noticed that the Respondents have not placed on record any authentic technical data / analysis that may reflect negatively on or rebut the accuracy of the reports, opinions and the conclusions drawn by various experts from the data and inf ormation made available to them .

[151] We are, therefore of the opinion that the conditions imposed and mitigating and remedial measures suggested by the experts if implemented in letter and spirit would adequately address the apprehensions expressed by the Resp ondents. We, accordingly, endorse and approve the NOCs/permission letters issued by the competent authorities and the recommendations of experts relating to execution, mitigation and remedial measures required to be adopted by the executing agency and allow the Project to proceed subject to the following conditions and directions: - Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 35 i) The appellant shall make all necessary arrangements to ensure that the monuments remain stable and undamaged in all respects during the execution of the Project as specified in the HIA and Study of Control of Vibration, Noise and Foundation; ii) Vibration monitoring shall be undertaken as a part of the monitoring plan using the crack measure devices such as Avongard Standard Tell -Tale throughout the construction period and for an add itional period of 10 weeks from the date of commencement of commercial operation of the train or such further time as may be directed by the Director General, Archaeology.

[152] In case, it is found that vibration levels at any stage of the construction or opera tion are exceeding safe limits, construction work / operation shall immediately be discontinued and remedial action shall be taken to ensure that such levels are brought down to acceptable limits. Such actions may inter alia include use of one piece of equ ipment at a time, during the construction phase, adjustment of train speed, addition of buffers and such other remedial and mitigating measures as may be recommended by the experts; iii) Technical experts shall be present at the sites during the construction ph ase in the vicinity of the antiquities and special premises with all necessary equipment for monitoring vibration levels.

[153] In case, vibration levels exceed the acceptable limits, work shall immediately be stopped, remedial measures taken to the satisfaction of experts and further work shall not commence unless written clearance for resumption of work is given by the experts; iv) An independent and experienced Conservation Engineer shall be appointed to monitor the Project, both during the construction and operat ion phases.

[154] He shall submit monthly reports to the Advisory Committee which shall make such further recommendations to the Director General, Archaeology as may be required to ensure that the Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 36 Project as a whole is meeting all technical requirements meant to preserve, protect and conserve the antiquities or protected premises; v) On completion of the project, the train shall be operated on experimental basis for at least 2 weeks on the entire length of the route and the vibration levels shall be monitored to ens ure that the same are within the acceptable limits.

[155] Commercial operation shall not commence unless written clearan ce is given by the experts confi rming that vibration levels have consistently been found to be within acceptable limits; vi) The speed of the Tra in shall be reduced while passing near the monuments as recommended by the Directorate General of Archaeology from time to time on the basis of data made available to it; vii) State of the art vibration measuring equipments shall permanently be installed at sui table places in and around the antiquities and special premises to monitor levels of vibration created by operation of the train.

[156] Records of the same shall be maintained and regularly checked by a responsible officer deputed to do so; viii) Special teams consist ing of qualified experts will be set up which will periodically inspect all antiquities and special premises to detect any damage or deterioration at the sites. Proper records and logbooks shall be maintained for this purpose; ix) Any damage or deterioration s hall be reported to the Director General, Archaeology in writing who shall take remedial steps necessary to ensure safety of the buildings and structures; x) Recommendations of the Advisory Committee (already set up) shall be placed before the Directorate General of Archaeology , who shall take necessary steps to ensure that the same are complied with in letter and spirit by all concerned agencies, contractors, sub -contractors and operators; Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 37 xi) Where excavation is necessary it shall be carried out in a way that it would not affect any structure or foundation of the antiquities or special premises.

[157] Where necessary special arrangements shall be made to stabilize and strengthen the structure of the antiquities and special premises. All necessary safety arrangements sh all be made in accordance with the best engineering expertise during excavation, construction and execution phases of the Project; xii) The executing agency shall install accelerometers, velocity transducers, noise detectors and vibration measuring equipment ne ar the antiquities and special premises.

[158] The appellant shall ensure implementation of additional mitigation and remedial measures as mentioned in vibration analysis report by NESPAK, Heritage Impact Assessment (HIA) as well as in the reports submitted by D r. Uppal and Dr. Rogers; xiii) Excavation would be carried out in a way that would not affect any of the exposed or buried structure of the Special Premises; xiv) In case of any adverse impact to the antiquities or special premises during excavation, construction or execution, the appellant and all other related agencies shall immediately and forthwith stop and discontinue further work, take all possible actions to protect and conserve the antiquities and special premises and in this regard, involve such experts and consultants as may be necessary to ensure that the causes and effects of the adverse impact are effectively removed; xv) A dedicated hotline shall be set up, telephone numbers whereof shall be prominently displayed in public areas around all antiquities and sp ecial premises for reporting damage or deterioration observed by members of the public or tourists; xvi) In case, any information/report is received by the Director General, Archaeology the same shall be investigated within 7 days and after receiving Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 38 recommenda tions (if any) from experts repair/ renovation work shall be commenced within 30 days; xvii) No building material or equipment shall be stored/stockpiled within protected area of the monuments; xviii) No change shall be made in the alignment of the track which brings a ny part of it nearer to the monuments than the distances set out hereinabove; xix) Dust pollution during construction shall be controlled through extensive sprinkling of water on regular basis and taking such other steps including but not limited to covering th e monuments with protective sheets in order to avoid any damage from dust; xx) The design of the viaduct and nearby stations in terms of colour and designing shall be in harmony with the setting and appearance of the monuments; xxi) The Hydraulic Tank of Shalamar G arden shall be restored, as far as possible, to its original position and the surrounding area will be converted into a green area; xxii) Structures on the southern side of the Shalamar Garden shall be camouflaged through construction of a wall in consultation w ith the Directorate General of Archaeology.

[159] All practica ble efforts shall be made to create a buffer Zone around Shalamar Garden as per proposal already pending in the Directorate General of Archaeology and other competent forums; xxiii) The decorative motifs of Shalamar Garden would be replicated on the train station near the Shalamar Garden to create harmony with the Garden; xxiv) The tile mosaic motifs of the Gulabi Bagh Gateway would be replicated on the nearby station of the Gateway to create harmony with the histo ric Gateway; xxv) The area around the Chauburji Gateway would be properly attended and developed into a greenbelt; Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 39 xxvi) The decorative motifs of the Chauburji Gateway would be replicated on the nearby station of the Chauburji Gateway to creat e a harmony with the historic Gateway; xxvii) The area around the Zaib -un-Nisa’s Tomb would be properly attended and developed; xxviii) The decorative motifs of the Zaib -un-Nisa’s Tomb would be replicated on the nearby station of the Zaib - un-Nisa’s Tomb to create harmony with the historic; xxix) The Respondents shall in consultation with UNESCO and other international agencies prepare phase -wise plan to control and monitor urban encroachments and the process of creating buffer zone around the Shalamar garden; xxx) All future projects which directly, indir ectly and incidentally involve antiquities or heritage sites shall in the first instance be widely publicized through print and electronic media at least 6 months prior to proposed date of commencement of the project and public hearings shall be conducted to hear objections, if any against such project; and xxxi) For all future projects, NOCs, licences, approvals and permissions as required by law shall be obtained before work on the project site is commenced. 51.

[160] In addition to the above, we direct the Governme nt of Punjab within a period of 30 days from the date of this judgment to take the following steps: - a) Set up an Antiquity and Special Premises Fund with the sum of Rupees One Hundred Million which shall be dedicated to monitoring, renovation and reconstruc tion work of 11 protected and special premises mentioned hereinabove.

[161] It shall be a revolving fund and shall be replenished on yearly basis . It shall be utilized firstly for the maintenance, preservation, restoration and renovation work of the protected and Special Premises, Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 40 subject matter of this lis and thereafter on other Antiquities and Special Premises situated in Lahore as may be recommended by the special Committee of Experts constituted under this Judgment ; b) A broad based Special Committee of Expert s consisting of Director General, Archeology Department; a Professor of the Department of Archeology, University of the Punjab; Head of Department of Structural Engineering, University of Engineering and Technology, Lahore; a Senior Professor nominated by the Chairman of Board of Directors of National College of Arts; chaired by a retired Judge of this Court nominated by the Chief Justice of Pakistan shall be notified which shall oversee implementation of the judgment of this Court and the directions issued herein.

[162] This Committee shall also make such further recommendations to the Chief Minister Punjab to undertake such measures as may be necessary to implement and enforce the directions and recommendations made in this judgment . The tenure of the Committee shall be one year from the date of its notification ; c) The Government of Punjab shall retain the services of at least three Experts having expertise in the field of archeology and renovation, preservation and maintenance of antiquities and special premises.

[163] One of the experts shall be a person having expertise in structural engineering . All three experts will work as a Technical Committee with tenure of one year . The Technical Committee shall report to advise and assist the aforesaid Special Committee of Exp erts. The Committee shall, if required and with the approval of Director General, Archeology retain services of such other experts as it may consider necessary to undertake its work more effectively regarding the steps required to be taken to monitor the protected and Special Premises all over Lahore and suggest remedial measures that may be necessary to ensure the safety of all protected and special premises in Lahore ; and Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 41 d) We also emphasize the fact that the present condition of the protected and special premises calls for major preservation, renovation, reconstruction and repair work.

[164] The Government of Punjab shall take immediate steps and we have been assured by learned Advocate General, Punjab that such steps shall immediately be taken to start repair a nd renovation work for which the requisite funds will be made available within thirty days from the date of this judgment. 52. In view of the foregoing discussion, the Impugned Judgment of the Lahore High Court is set aside and the instant appeals are al lowed in terms noted above.

[165] Civil Petition No.3101 -L of 2016 is unanimously dismissed and Leave to Appeal is refused. 53. Before parting with this judgment, we would like to record our appreciation for valuable assistance rendered by learned counsel for the Appellants namely; Mr. Shahid Hamid, Sr.ASC, Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, Sr.ASC, Kh .

[166] Haris Ahmed, Sr.ASC, and Mr. Shakeel -ur-Rehman, learned Advocate General, Punjab and Ms. Asma Jehangir, Sr.ASC and Kh. Ahmed Hussain, ASC for the Respondents alongwith their respective teams. We would also like to acknowledge and commend the hard work assistance and backup provided by the Law Clerks of members of the Bench.

[167] Judge Judge Judge Judge Judge Announced in open Court On 08.12.2017 at Islamabad. Judge APPROVED FOR REPORTING Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 42 EJAZ AFZAL KHAN,J .-Every thickly populated city like Lahore needs a Mass Transit System. The system already in place with rapidly growing population has become inadequate.

[168] A project of this type could have been conceived at least tw o decades ago. But the people at the helm could not appreciate its importance. They realize d to pay heed to it when the water was to go above their head s. It is never too late to mend is an adage which could console even the late starter.

[169] Since the things do not remain static and stationary, the problems the late starters face become greater in magnitude. They, thus, have to mend fences according to the situation which has changed a great deal. Had this project been launched twenty years ago it would not ha ve harmed anything of significance because there was sufficient space all around.

[170] Take for instance the ShalimarGarden . In the seventies of the twentieth century it was the sole monument in the area having noth ing around it. B ut today it is surrounded by b uildings on almost all the sides. Whatever setup we may have today and whatever odds we may come across, the project of the Orange Line Metro Train (OLMT) which is a dire need of the people living in Lahorehas to be launched and completed.

[171] The main issue we are confronted with is the preservation of the heritage sites (Antiquities and Special Premises) . If the establishment of the Mass Transit System is indispensable so is the preservation of the heritage sites. What perils does this project purportedly brin g to the heritage sites could be summed up as under: 1) Visual impairment of the sites and 2) Damage to the building structure of the heritage sites by vibration during the phase of construction and that of operation.

[172] Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 43 Before examining the aforesaid aspects, we h ave to consider the present state and surrounding of each of the heritage sites. 2. The first heritage site in the sequence is Shalimar Garden. It is surrounded by densely constructed houses on three and a dualcarriageway, on the fourth side, which is fr equented by heavy vehicular traffic.

[173] The proposed railway track is being constructed in the mid of the said dual carriageway. The proposed construction does not cause any visual impairment of the site because the Garden is walled on all the fours. A pedest rian walking on one or another side of the road cannot see anything inside the Garden.

[174] Vibration caused by the operation of the train does not pose any threat to the Garden when there is a considerable distance between the walls of the Garden and the rail way track. Hydraulic tank is also a part of the heritage site.But it is not likely to be damaged by the proposed construction of the railway track as none of the piers for the track has been raised in the area where the tank lies. 3.

[175] The next heritage sit e is Gulabi Bagh’s Gateway. Its left, right and back are covered by double -story buildings, whereas, front is flanked by a dual carriageway. Railway track is being constructed in the middle of the road which has least impact on the site. If the buildings o n its left, right and back have done little to damage it, the railway track too would do little to damage its viability.

[176] Vibration caused by the train could be said to pose a threat to the heritage site but when the one caused by the vehicular traf fic desp ite being of much greater magnitude has not posed any , there is absolutely no occasion for being paranoid about the vibration caused by the train. There are cracks in the dome and the crown of the arches but in any case the structure Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 44 has not reached an edg e where it could be declared dangerous as per report of Dr.

[177] Ayesha Pamela Rogers. Even if it be so, the benchmark could not be the fast dilapidating state of the building but the one which isrestored on its being repaired and revamped. In case it is left i n the present state, tomorrow even a violent gust of wind could cause its collapse. Measures to protect the site have to be taken in any case.

[178] The proposed railway track, in this context, is not a threat to the existence of the site. NESPAK and TYPSA, too, do not see any threat to the site on account of the construction of the track and operation of the train. Safeguards provided by law and highlighted in the report of Professor Coninghamhave also been taken care of in the NOC issued by the Director -General of Archaeology, Government of Punjab.

[179] Visual impairment is the only problem to be attended to but the fact is that the space left at the moment across the site does not cause any visual impairment as the pedestrians walking on one or another side of the r oad could well see the façade of the garden. In this situation, we cannot pursue the ideal or what ought to have been.

[180] We have to preserve whatever can possibly be preserved. We, thus, do not see anything as could hinder or hamper a ‘go -ahead’ signal to th e proposed construction of the railway track as far as this site is concerned. 4. Buddhu’s tomb is another impediment so -called in the construction of the railway track.

[181] It is also situated alongside the dualcarriageway. The part of the railway track nea r the site is resting on fourpiers raised on the strip in between the dual carriageway. Vibration caused by the operation of the train cannot affect much less adversely the fabric of the site and structure of what is built therein.

[182] This is not an opinion b ased on guesswork. This is an opinion based on deduction. The basis for that said deduction is Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 45 that the vibration caused by the heavy vehicular traffic which, thus far, did not cause even a crack in any part of the structure on the site.

[183] What is strange an d even surprising is that disaster on account of vibration caused to the site by the operation of train has been visualized without comparing the vibration caused by the vehicular traffic which appears to be of much greater magnitude. The proposed and part ially completed Mass Transit System cannot be obstructed on the basis of assumptions which have no concrete foundations.

[184] The piers already raised in between the dual carriageway do not obstruct the vision of pedestrians walking on either side of the road. 5. Having said so, we now pass on to LakshamiBuilding. This building has been demolished but its façade still stands in its original position and this is what is sought to be protected and preserved.

[185] Construction of the railway track does not meddle, nor does it compromise the sanctity of its façade for two reasons: the first is that a road intervenes in between the building and the railway track, the second is the heavy vehicular traffic plied on the road whose vibration by no scale of measurement is les s than that of the train.

[186] Even visual impairment does not appear to be a problem as the pedestrians on one or another side of the road could see the façade of the building. A look at the photographs of the building and its surroundings shows that piers hav e been partially constructed without causing any damage to the façade.

[187] Even otherwise the proposed railway track does not intervene with the building because of the distance between the two. We have been just left wondering how the completion of this proje ct is opposed on the basis of the apprehension which are conjectural. Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 46 6. We now deal with Chauburji.

[188] This site makes a complex reading. The proposed railway track encroaches upon its courtyardas the piers have been raised therein but when we compare the distance between the heritage site and the road and the distance between the pi ers and the site , the latter appears to be far greater than the former .

[189] But in any case, the proposed railway track causes less intrusion and less visual impairment to the site as compared to the road and vehicular traffic. Known or conventionally recognized standards of protecting the monuments cannot be adhered to without realigning the road and the track. If the road could stay where it stands so could continue the proposed construction of the track as it too does not cause any harm to the site.Vibration caused by the train will not cause any damage to the site when vibration caused by the vehicular traffic did not cause any so far.

[190] Protection of the site in terms of ideal agai nst this backdrop is just unworkable. We, thus, have to accept it as it is. 7. Zaib-un-Nisa’s tomb is another heritage site whose existence is alleged to be jeopardized by the proposed construction of the railway track, notwithstanding it is far off the road and has all along been surrounded by double story buildings on all the sides.

[191] How the proposed construction of the railway track could cause visual impairment and how the vibration of the train could cause any damage thereto, are the queries begging answers. It is, therefore, nothing but creating a storm in a tea cup. Even otherwise, if the heavy construction aroundthe heritage site and the vehicular traffic plied on the dualcarriageway could not cause a hairline crack, apprehending any threat to the si te from the proposed construction of the railway track and the operation of the train would be just chimerical.

[192] Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 47 8. Now we are to see whether the proposed railway track impinges on the health and existence of the heritage sitesinspite of the fact that the track is going underground which in the technical parlance is called cut and cover. The study which has been undertaken by the experts in this connection led to certain reservations.

[193] These reservations when considered carefully do not appear to be of a nat ure as could justify change of site but observance of certain measures which ensure their protection against an imagined or actual danger arising out of the operation of the train. It may, however, be noted that many of the measures already taken adequatel ycater for the reservations.

[194] It is,thus, not the end of the chapter which would end with the construction of the track and operation of the train. Any measure which is ancillary and reasonably incidental could still be taken at any time if and when anythin g endangering the heritage sites appears or emerges. Much hue and cry has been raised about the vibration caused by the operation of the train and its effect on the heritage sites.

[195] We have again be en left wondering as to how vibration caused by the OLMT could damage the wellengineered and well architecture d structure of the site s when much greater vibration caused by heavier trains of Pakistan Western Railway did not cause even a crack in the walls of the guard rooms constructed alongside the barriers of the railway track s more than hundred years ago. 9.

[196] How do the experts look at the railway track and its impact on the heritage sites in terms of vibration and visual impairment? A careful perusal of their opinions would reveal that each of them has his own angle of vision . Yet their opinions are not antithetical to each other. They do not see anything in the railway track as could impinge on the health and existence of the heritage Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 48 sites in any form.

[197] Dr. Ayesha Pamela Rogers’ expert opinion would support the conclusion when she says that the vibration produced during the construction and operational phase for all sites and sides will be within the permitted limits. She sees an enemy of the sites in dust which could be raised during the phase of construction b ut it cannot be blown out of proportion when much greater dust is raised by the heavy vehicular traffic plied on the dualcarriageway which runs across the sites.

[198] She nevertheless suggested ways and means for the treatment of the problem emerging from the construction of the railway track and operation of the train which could well be taken care of. At times her eyes are more focused on the surrounding than the heritage site as if the site is an angle and not an object of vision.

[199] But it too can be attended t o, by beautifying the surroundings which have been impaired by the unplanned massive construction. Beautification of the surroundings at any rate, is a yearning which at no stage becomes unmeaning. According to NESPAK the vibration will have least impact o n the sites. TYPSA appears to be in agreement with NESPAK.

[200] Report of Professor Coningham focuses more on the imagined violation of law than the damage to be caused to the heritage sites. His expertise in the field does not enlighten us much on the technica l aspects of the proposed construction. Report given by Dr.Javed Uppal expressed satisfaction with the measures already taken and to be taken to ensure foolproof protection of the heritage sites against noise and vibration.

[201] His report does not suggest the change of site for the construction of the railway trackbut it has not been given much weight by the High Court. The reason in this behalf is not any lapse in his expertise but his supposed bias on account of a position he held in the government of Punjab a few years ago.

[202] Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 49 10. Let us see how and where does the construction of the railway track make inroads in the domain of the law protecting the heritage sites and how and where do the NOCs violate its letter and spirit? Before we answer these questions, we would like to go through the relevant provisions of Section 22 of the Antiquities Act 1975: “22.

[203] Execution of development schemes and new constructions in proximity to immovable antiquity. – Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no development plan or scheme or new construction on, or within a distance of two hundred feet of, a protected immovable antiquity shall be undertaken or executed except with the approval of the Director General.” What does Section 11 of Th e Punjab Special Premises Ordinance 1985 envisage in this behalf can well be seen from the words reproduced as under: “11.

[204] Execution of development schemes and new constructions in proximity to Special Premises. — No development plan or scheme or new const ruction on, or within a distance of two hundred feet of a Special Premises shall be undertaken or executed except with the approval of the Government or a Committee.” 11.

[205] The provisions reproduced above show that the legislature provided adequate safeguar ds for the protection of the heritage sites in terms of distance between the sites and the constructions proposed to be raised in their proximity. In case the Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 50 distance provided by the law cannot be adhered to because of the irreversible developments taking place in the meantime,what could be the way out to kill the snake and yet save the stick.

[206] The answer provided by the law is an NOC issued by the DG Archaeology in respect of Antiquities and an NOC by the Special Committee constituted under the Ordinance i n respect of Special Premises.But in no case it could be accepted asa gospel truth. It could be changed, modified or revised if the NOC issued for the proposed construction violates the sanctity of the site.

[207] It is not injusticiable. The High Court and for that matter this Court could issue an appropriate order, writ or direction if the NOC for the proposed construction has been issued without safeguarding the sanctity and integrity of the sites. Let us see how do the NOCs issued by the competent authority i n this behalf deal with the risk to the Antiquities.

[208] NOCs on being read provide the following measures which are common in all: “A) No building material or equipment shall be stored/stocked within the protected area of the monuments. B) No change shall be made in the alignment of the track which brings any part of it nearer to the monuments than the distances set out in the Report of the Advisory Committee.

[209] C) Dust pollution during construction shall be controlled through extensive sprinkling of water on regular basis. D) Such further special arrangements shall be made, as necessary, to keep the monument stable and un - damaged in all respects during the execution of the Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 51 project as specified in HIA and Study of Control of Vibrations, Noise and Foundation.

[210] E) The design of the viaduct and nearby station in terms of colour and reflectivity should be in harmony with the setting and appearance of the monuments. F) Vibration monitoring must be undertaken as part of a Monitoring Plan using the crack measures devic es such as Avogard Standard tell -tales throughout construction period of and for a period of 10 weeks after commencement of train operations and more time period if so directed.

[211] If levels of vibrations exceed safe limits further action must be taken to bri ng such levels down such as adjustment of train speed, additional buffer, etc., Visual Inspection of indicators other than cracks shall also be part of the Monitoring Plans. G) An independent and experience d Conservation Engineer must be engaged by the ex ecuting agency, and later by the operating agency, to monitor the Project both during its construction and operational phases who shall submit monthly reports to the Advisory Committee which shall in turn make such further recommendations as may be require d to the Directorate - General Archaeology.

[212] This monitoring shall be in addition to monitoring by the technical staff of the Directorate - General Archaeology. H) The speed of the train shall be reduced while passing in front of monuments as recommended by Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 52 the Directorate General of Archaeology from time to time on the basis of the available data.

[213] I) Recommendations of the Advisory Committee shall be complied by all the involved agencies in letter and spirit. ” Some of the measures are site specific which re ad as under: A) The area around the Hydraulic tank would be properly attended and developed into green belt. B) Shabby structures on the southern side of the Shalamar Garden would be camouflaged through construction of a wall in consultation of Directorate Gener al of Archaeology.

[214] C) The decorative motifs of the Shalamar Garden would be replicated on the nearby station of the Garden to create a harmony with the historic Garden. D) The tile mosaic motifs of the Gulabi Bagh Gateway would be replicated on the nearby stati on of the Gateway to create harmony with the historic Gateway.

[215] E) The area around the Chuburji Gateway would be properly attended and developed into a green belt. F) The decorative motifs of the Chuburji Gateway would be replicated on the nearby station of the Chuburji Gateway to create a harmony with the historic Gateway. G) The area around the Zaib -Un-Nisa’ s Tomb would be properly attended and developed .

[216] H) The decorative motifs of the Zaib -Un Nisa’s Tomb would be replicated on the nearby station of the Za ib- Un Ni sa’s Tomb to create harmony with the historic Tomb. Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 53 NOC issued by the competent authority for Special Premises contained the following conditions: a.

[217] Excavation would be carried out in a way that it would not affect any of the exposed or buried structure of t he Special Premises. b. Wherever necessary special arrangement would be made to stabilize and strengthen the standing structures of the Special Premises. c. Area of the Special Premises would not be used for storing material or parking construction machinery and safety arrangements shall be made in accordance with the best engineering practice during excavation, construction and execution phases of the project. d.

[218] If any damage occurred to Special Premises the executing agency will conserve that part from its resources in consultation with the Directorate General Archaeology. e. An independent and experience d Conservative Engineer shall be engaged by Lahore Development Authority/ Punjab MasstransitAuthority, to monitor the Project during excavation , construction and execution phases who shall submit regular reports to the Directorate -General Archaeology which shall be presented to the Committee which may make further recommendations as may be required.

[219] This monitoring shall be in addition to monitoring by the technica l staff of the Directorate -General Archeology. f. Excavation would be carried out in a way that it would not affect any exposed or buried structure of the Special Premises. Wherever necessary special Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 54 arrangement would be made to stabilize and strengthen the standing structures of the Special Premises. g.

[220] The executing agency shall install accelerometers, velocity transducers and noise detectors nearby the Special Premises. h. The executing agency shall ensure the implementation of the additional mitigation measur es as mentioned in vibration analysis Reports of NESPAK and Heritage Impact Assessment. i.

[221] In case of any adverse impact to the Special Premises during excavation, construction and execution phases of the Project, the executing agency will take all possible a ctions to conserve that part from its resources in consultation and as per advice of the Directorate General of Archaeology. j. In case of any violation of the above -mentioned conditions during the excavation, construction or execution phase of the Project t his Permission/NOC will be treated as withdrawn and the executing agency (LDA) and any other involved agencies shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the Punjab Special Premises (Preservation) Ordinance, 1985.

[222] These NOCs cannot be looked askance at when the conditions provided therein are effective and adequate. Rigid adherence to the distance provided by law in view of the roads and buildings already constructed has become practically impossible. It, therefore, cannot be over emphasized i n the present state of things unless of course the entire mass of roads and buildings is razed and erased.

[223] If that is not possible, we have to live with it and go ahead without getting bogged down into a controversy which may Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 55 distract the executors of the project from the completion of the Mass Transit System which is launched for the welfare of the people. 12. The main thrust of the arguments of the learned ASCs for the appellants was that the final NOCs issued by the authorities conform to the opinion s of the experts viz -a-viz the measures to be taken during the phase of construction and that of operation which are by all means effective and adequate and fully cater for the apprehensions of the respondents.

[224] We endorse the views of the experts because t hey also conform to the grave ground realities emanating from our surrounding. We could not, thus, prefer the unknown to known and theoretical to practical. 13. The learned ASCs for the respondents addressed lengthy arguments but they are based more on t heir apprehension than rational and realistic understanding of the controversy.

[225] They stridently criticized the opinions of the experts without precisely pointing out any infirmity or imperfection therein. They, however, extolled to the skies the report of Professor Coningham without realizing that it focused, more on legal than the technical aspects of the construction of the railway track.

[226] They could not give relevant facts and figures either on technical or factual plain. They see heal -all in the arrival of the experts from UNESCO as Zoroastrians see heal -all in reappearance of Zoroastor. We should not, however, forget that we have our own problems. We can understand them better by studying them in the context of our surroundings and solve them accordingly by applying our minds.

[227] What in the prevailing state of things would be sane, sound and sensible could be decided by the local experts who know the ins and outs of the project and its impact on the sites. The measures and conditions suggested in the NOCs i n view of the reports of the experts reflect Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 56 the understanding of the problems and their solution according to our surroundings. 14.

[228] We, therefore, allow these appeals, set aside the impugned judgments and direct the appellants to go ahead with the proj ect by rigidly adhering to the measures suggested by the experts for the protection and preservation of the heritage sites. JUDGE Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 57 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN (Appellate Jurisdiction) PRESENT : MR.

[229] JUSTICE EJAZ AFZAL KHAN MR. JUSTICE SH. A ZMAT SAEED MR. JUSTICE MAQBOOL BAQAR MR. JUSTICE IJAZ UL AHSAN MR. JUSTICE MAZHAR ALAM KHAN MIANKHEL C.M.A. NOS.8215 AND 6171 OF 2016 AND CIV IL APPEAL NO.2144 OF 2016, C.M .A. NO. 6225 OF 2016 AND CIVIL APPEAL NO.2145 OF 2016, C.M.A. NO.6226 OF 20 16 AND CIVIL APPEAL NO.2146 O F 2016, C.M.A.

[230] NO.62 91 OF 2016 AND CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2147 OF 2016 (Against the judgment dated 19.8.2016 of the Lahore High Court, Lahore passed in WP No. C.M.A. NOS.8215 & 6171 OF 2016 AND CIV IL APPEAL NO.2144 OF 2016 Nationa l Engineering Services Pakistan [NESPAK] (Pvt.) Limited Applicant(s)/Appellant(s) Versus Kamil Khan Mumtaz and others Respondent(s) C.M.A.

[231] NO. 6225 OF 2 016 AND CIVIL APPEAL NO.2145 OF 2016 Punjab Mass transit Authority through its Managing Director, Lahore Applicant(s)/Appellant(s) Versus Kamil Khan Mumtaz and others Respondent(s) C.M.A. NO.6226 OF 20 16 AND CIVIL APPEAL NO.2146 OF 2016 Lahore Development Authority through its D. G. and another Appl icant(s)/Appellant(s) Versus Kamil Khan Mumtaz and others Respondent(s) AND C.M.A.

[232] NO.6291 OF 20 16 AND CIVIL APPEAL NO.2147 OF 2016 Province of Punjab through Chief Secretary, Lahore and others Applicant(s)/Appellant(s) Versus Kamil Khan Mumtaz and others Respondent(s) … For the Applicant/Appellant(s): Mr. Shahid Hamid, Sr. ASC Mr. Mahmood A. Sheikh, AOR assisted by Rabia Hassan, Advocate Mr.

[233] Salman Hafeez, G.M. NESPAK (in CA.) Mr. Makhd oom Ali Khan, Sr. ASC with Mr. Tariq Aziz, AOR Assisted by Mr. Saad Hashmi, Advocate Mr. Sarmad Hani, Advocate Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 58 Mr. Sabtain Fazal Haleem, M.D. PMA (in CA.) Kh. Haris Ahmed, Sr. ASC Mr. Mustafa Ramday, ASC Mr. Tariq Aziz, AOR Assisted by Mr.

[234] Za afir Khan, Advocate Mr. Ahmed Jamal, Advocate Israr Saeed, Chief Engineer, LDA Muhammad Rashid, Dir. (Law), LDA Muhammad Hassan, Dy. Dir (Engineering) , LDA Hafiz Nisar Hussain, A. Dir (Law), LDA (in CA.) Mr. Shakeel -ur-Rehman, AG Punjab Ms. Asm a Hamid, Addl. AG Punjab Barrister Qasim Ali Chohan, Asstt.

[235] A.G. Pb. Rao M. Yousaf Khan, AOR (Absent) Mr. Khurram Chughtai, Strategic Counsel (in CA ) For the Respondent(s): Ms. Asma Jehangir, Sr. ASC, a/w Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR Mr. Kami l Khan Mumtaz Assisted by Mr. Noor Ejaz Chauhdry, Advocate Mr. Hamid Azim Leghari, Advocate Ms. Namra Gillani. Advocate Ms. Ayesha Alam Malik, Advocate Mr.

[236] Suleman Jahangir, Advocate (For respondent No. 1 in CAs 2144 to ) Kh. Ahmad Hussain, ASC Mr. M. Ozair Chughtai, AOR (Absent) (For respondents No.2 in CAs 2144 to ) Mr. Azhar Siddique, ASC Mr. M. Ozair Chughtai, AOR (Absent) Assisted by Mr. Abdullah Malik, Advocate Mr. Hammyun Faiz Ra sool, Advocate Mian Shabbir Ismail, Advocate Mr.

[237] Muhammad Irfan Mukhtar, Advocate Ms. Parveen Moghal, Advocate Ms. Hifsa Mafia, Advocate (For respondent No. 3 in CA ) (For respondent s No. 3 -5 in CA s 2145, 2146 &  ) Mr. Shakeel ur Rehman, AG Punjab Ms. Asma Hamid, Addl. AG Punjab Barrister Qasim Ali Chouhan, AAG Punjab (For Govt . of Punjab) Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR (For respondent No. 17 in CAs 2144 & ) (For respondent No. 19 in CA 214 ) (For respondent No. 1 6 in CA 214716) Dates of Hearing: 3rd to 6th, 10th to 14th & 17th April, 2017 Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 59 -,-,-.-.-.-.-.-.

[238] Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 60 JUDGMENT MAQBOOL BAQAR, J. Brought in question through the above appeals is the judgment dated 19th August 2016, whereby a learned Division Bench of the Lahore High Court, whilst partially allowing the petitions filed by the respondents No. 1 to 3, declared that the No Objection Certificates (‘ NOC s’) issued by the Director General, Archaeology, Punjab and the Chief Secretaries’ Committee, for the construction of Lahore Orange Line Metro Train (‘OLMT ’) Project, was without lawful authority, and of no legal effect, and directed the Director General, Archaeology to engage an independent panel of consultants/ exper ts of international stature, preferably in consultation with UNESCO, to carry out an independent study regarding the protected immovable antiquities and special premises situated along the alignment of the OLMT track.

[239] The Court also directed that the reque st for permission sought under section 22 of the Antiquities Act, 1975 (‘ the 1975 Act’), and under section 11 of the Punjab Special Premises (Preservation) Ordinance, 1985 (“ the 1985 Ordinance ”), respectively, be considered by the competent authorities in the light of the study and report of the said experts, afresh.

[240] The Court also directed the Government to frame rules under section 22 of the 1975 Act, and under section 11 of the 1985 Ordinance. 2. Through their petitions, the respondents No. 1 to 3 have challenged before the High Court the aforesaid NOCs, as being violative of section 22 of the 1975 Act, and section 11 of the 1985 Ordinance, respectively.

[241] It was contended that the construction of the OLMT Project that will run along five heritage building s, and five special premises (the monuments), will cause severe damage to the structure of the said monuments, harm their integrity and shall also Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 61 cause their visual impairment.

[242] It was submitted that the project is being constructed within the protective/b uffer zone of two hundred feet (200 ft.), prescribed by the 1975 Act, and the 1985 Ordinance respectively, and in dangerously close proximity to the said monuments. It was submitted that the vibrations induced during the construction activity by use of va rious equipments/ machinery, and by the transit of the project train, in such close proximity would cause severe and irreversible damage to the said monuments, some of which are more than 370 years of age.

[243] It was submitted that as per the internationally r ecognized standards and scientific data, and literature, the amplitude of the vibrations induced and suffered as aforesaid shall be far in excess of the threshold/tolerance level which shall certainly cause irreversible harm and damage to the monuments.

[244] It was claimed that the viaduct structure of the project being constructed in close proximity to the monuments would certainly impair their visual integrity and would break the view line, between the viewers and the monuments. It was further submitted that o ne of the heritage premises, being the Shalimar Gardens, because of its Outstanding Universal Value (‘ OUV ’) has been inscribed on the World Heritage List maintained by UNESCO.

[245] However because of the impugned construction and the resultant harm envisaged on account thereof in the shape of physical damage, and visual impairment, the relevant Committees of UNESCO, not only requested the Government to change the alignment of the OLMT project, but also to suspend the construction of the project along with the al ignment of the Shalimar Gardens, and close to its hydraulic tank which is a core element of the Garden.

[246] However subsequently on account of certain assurances given by the Government of the Punjab, they Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 62 agreed not to press for the suspension of the work, bu t insisted upon the change of alignment/route as requested earlier with a caution that non -compliance may result in removing the monument from the World Heritage List.

[247] It was submitted that the above monuments are the heart and soul of the city of Lahore a nd carry with them our glorious past which we are obliged to protect and preserve, and to hand over them in a safe and sound condition to the next generation. 3. It may be relevant to note here that the original feasibility study in relation to the OLMT p roject was undertaken by a consulting firm, namely, MVA Asia, for a 27.1 km track (20.2 km elevated and 6.9 km underground), including 26 stations (20 elevated and 6 underground) at a total cost of US$ 2.00 billion exclusive of land acquisition.

[248] An addendu m to the study was completed by NESPAK, one of the appellants before us, in the year 2014, in which the length of the track remained 27.1 km and aligned over or under the median of the road as envisaged by MVA Asia. However, as claimed by the appellants, i n order to minimize the land to be acquired for the track, the underground portion was reduced to 1.7 km and the cost was thus reduced to US$ 1.6 billion .

[249] It was decided that 1.72 kms of the total 27.1 km length of the route would be cut and cover (undergr ound) and the remaining 25.4 km would be an elevated viaduct. 4. The viaduct of the OLMT project consists of U -shaped girders (two separate channel shaped track way in pre -stressed concrete) resting upon the piers which are general ly 30m apart.

[250] The viaduc t system is supported on piles and a pile cap substructure system. The 1.85m thick pile cap consists of 6 piles of 1.2m diameter and 18m l ength. Piers of viaduct are generally of 2300m m (1.2 m) Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 63 diameters. The height of piers i s generally 13.5 m.

[251] A 10m long transom (double cantilevered reinforced concrete arms) rests over the top of piers to support the U shaped girders . 5. In the 1.7 km cut and cover (underground) section, construction methodology is to erect barricades on either side of the road , about 1 2 meter apart, drill holes of a dia of 0.76 meters in straight lines on either side of the road, lower iron cages into the holes and concrete the same, excavate the area in between to a depth of 3 meters, construct a 0.8 meter thick reinforced concrete roof joining the concreted piles on either side, then excavate the earth under the tunnel formed by the roof and the piles on either side with a clear height of 5.60 meters, place a concrete slab 0.6 meters on the floor of the tunnel, and wall the gaps (0.30 to 0.45 meters wide) in between the concrete piles with water proofing materials and vibration dampening materials. 6.

[252] The viaduct bridge and the cut and cover subway/tunnel shall carry BI type trains (according to Chinese standard), consisting of 5 vehic les. The axel load of type BI train is 140 kN, and the axel load of empty vehicle is 80 kN. 7. The Project has a total of 26 stations, 24 of which are elevated and two are underground.

[253] The proximate rider ship would be 2,45,000/ - per day. The operation ti me of the trains would be from 5:30 a.m. to 11:30 p.m. (18 hours daily). The total estimated cost of the Project as approved on 13.05.2015 is US$1.629 billion, equal to Rs. 165.226 billion, out of which the cost of civil works is Rs.54.421 billion.

[254] Accordi ng to the appellants civil work worth 46% of the total estimated cost thereof, amounting to Rs. 27.999 billion, has been completed up to 30th August, 2016. 8. The Project passes along the following monuments: Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 64 Antiquities : (i) Shalimar Garden (World Heritage Site)-95 feet away from the train tracks (ii) Gulabi Bagh Gateway -69 feet away from the train tracks (iii) Buddu’s Tomb -59 feet away from the train tracks (iv) Chauburji -53 feet away from the train tracks (v) Zebunnisa’s Tomb -110 feet away Special Premises : (i) Lakshmi Building -34 feet away from the train tracks (ii) General Post Office (GPO) -42.3 feet away from the train tracks (iii) Aiwan -e-Auqaf (Shah Chiragh) Building -66 feet away from the train tracks (iv) Supreme Court Building -58.1 feet away from the train tracks (v) Mauj Darya Darbar & Mosque -15.8 feet away from the train tracks 9.

[255] On 16.11.2015 , the Director General Archaeology issued no objection certificate for construction of the OLMT project along the alignment of five (5) heritage buildings protected under the Act of 1975. Similar NOC was issued on 30.11.2015, in respect of the special premises protected under the 1985 Ordinance.

[256] By order dated 28.1.2016, passed in the respondents’ petition, a learned Division Bench of the Lahore High Court suspended the said two NOCs, and restrained th e present appellants form carrying on any construction work within two hundred feet (200 ft.) of the said monuments. According to the appellants, it was on 15.2.2016, that the “advisor committee” under the chairmanship of the DG Archaeology, decided to req uest LDA to engage an independent structural engineer to evaluate the effect of the OLMT project on the monuments during construction and operational phases.

[257] The Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 65 committee also decided to engage Dr. Ayesha Pamela Rogers to conduct a Heritage Impact Assessm ent (HIA), of the project. In pursuance of the above, on 24.2.2016, Dr. Engineer Javed Uppal submitted his vibration assessment report, whereas Dr. Ayesha Pamela Rogers submitted her report on 05.3.2016.

[258] M/s NESPAK, who has submitted a vibration analysi s report in respect of the viaduct/elevated section of the project earlier, submitted their such report in respect of the cut & cover/subway section, in February 2016. By order dated 14.10.2016, this Court was pleased to appoint M/s TYPSA Asia Consultant E ngineering and Professor Cunningham, whose names were separately suggested by the appellants and respondents respectively, as technical experts for verification of the credibility of the two NESPAK reports.

[259] Cunningham report was submitted before this Cour t on 13.11.2016, and the TYPSA report was so submitted on 19.11.2016. 10. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the relevant record, including the various reports submitted in the matter from time to time, thoroughly. 11. As suc cinctly put by Mr.

[260] Kamil Khan Mumtaz, the effect of vibrations on the monuments depends on:  Magnitude of Vibration produced by a particular action  Distance between vibration source and the vibration receiver  The condition of the monument  Nature of mediums through which it travels to receiver (soil, concrete etc.) 12.

[261] National Cooperative Highway Research Program (2012) , as quoted by Dr. Pamela Rogers , states that “Operation of Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 66 heavy construction equipment, particularly pile drivers , and other impact devi ces such as pavement breakers, creates seismic waves that radiate along the surface of the earth and downward into the earth.

[262] These surface waves can be felt as ground vibration. Vibration from operation of this equipment can result in damage to buildings including cracks, tilting and subsidence. As seismic waves travel outward from a vibration source, they excite the particles of rock and soil through which the waves pass and cause the particles to oscillate. 13.

[263] The term “threshold damage vibration level ” is defined as the highest vibration level at which no cosmetic, minor, or major damage occurs. The manner in which a particular building will respond dynamically to strong ground vibration depends on many factors, among which are the soil on which the bu ilding is founded, the building’s foundation (e.g., spread footing, piles), the building’s mass and the stiffness of the building’s main structural elements.

[264] The condition of a building and its maintenance are important factors when assessing susceptibilit y to vibration damage and must be taken into account when setting vibration limits. 14. The study of the vibration induced by a train transit in a building located along the line requires solution of the following three sub -problems:  source problem, i.e. the definition of the physical mechanism responsible for the generation of vibrations induced by the transit of trains , and the evaluation of the vibration level at a short distance from the track;  propagation problem, i.e. the study of propagation of vib ration from the source to the building; Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 67  structural response, evaluation of the modification to the vibration signal induced by the building components (i.e. foundations, load bearing structure, including infill walls, and floor plates ). 15.

[265] The physical p arameters of the transit facility, the geology, and the receiving building all influence the vibration levels . The important physical parameters can be divided into following four categories:  Operational and Vehicle Factors: This category includes all the parameters that relate to the vehicle and operation of the trains.

[266] Factors such as high speed, stiff primary suspensions on the vehicle, and flat or worn wheels will increase the possibility of problems from ground -borne vibration.  The ideal rail vehicle , with respect to minimizing ground -borne vibration, should have a low unsprung weight , a soft primary suspension, a minimum of metal -to-metal contact between moving parts of the truck , and smooth wheels that are perfectly round .

[267] A limit for the vertical res onance frequency of the primary suspension should be included in the specifications for any new vehicle.  Geology: Soil and subsurface conditions are known to have a strong influence on the levels of ground -borne vibration. Among the most important factors are the stiffness and internal damping of the soil and the depth to bedrock .

[268] Experience with ground -borne vibration is such that vibration propagation is more efficient in stiff clay soils, than in loose sandy soil, and shallow rock seems to concentrate t he vibration energy close to the surface and can result in ground -borne Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 68 vibration problems at large distances from the track.

[269] Subways/Tunnels founded in rock will result in lower vibration amplitudes close to the subway due to efficient propagation, as the vibration level does not attenuate as rapidly in rock as it does in soil . Factors such as layering of the soil and depth to water table can have significant effects on the propagation of ground -borne vibration.

[270] Soil layering will have a substantial, but unpredictable, effect on the vibration levels since each stratum can have significantly different dynamic characteristics . The presence of the water table may have a significant effect on ground -borne vibration, but a definite relationship has not been established.

[271] Factors Related to Vibration Receiver Foundation Type: The general rule -of-thumb is that heavier the building foundation, the greater the coupling loss as the vibration propagates from the ground into the building. Building Construction: Since ground -borne vibration and noise are almost always evaluated in terms of indoor receivers, the propagation of the vibration through the building must be considered.

[272] Each building has different characteristics relative to structure -borne vibration , althoug h the general rule -of-thumb is , the more massive the building, the lower the levels of ground -borne vibration. Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 69 Acoustical Absorption: The amount of acoustical absorption in the receiver room affects the levels of ground -borne noise. 16.

[273] Indeed, “ Historica l structures are particularly vulnerable to the effects of vibrations generated at an adjacent site. Deferred maintenance and past alterations may have produced structural weak points that are susceptible to damage. Historic finishes, such as plaster walls and ceilings, lack the flexibility to accommodate abnormal movement, while shallow foundations (common in historic buildings ) may lack the rigidity to resist vibration induced movement.” (Randl 2001) 17.

[274] However, we have noted that all analysis and studi es which purportedly formed the basis for the issuance of the NOC s, in question were carried out/undertaken, without certain very relevant basic and crucial information and specifications, like there is absolutely no technical information /evaluation about the stability, strength, endurance level/threshold , or vulnerability/susceptibility of the structure of any of the eleven (11) monuments in relation to the OLMT project, out of which monuments five (5), being protected antiquities under section 10 of the 1 975 Act, are by definition, “ancient” buildings.

[275] There is absolutely no information about the foundations, their strength, shape, size , and extent of these monuments . Absolutely no physical/technical examination/test or analysis of the monuments has been c onducted in relation to the subject project , though all of the above information & tests were absolutely inevitable to determine the endurance/threshold level and the susceptibility of the monuments in relation to the amplitude of the vibration caused by t he construction machinery/equipments, and/ or by transit of the train.

[276] Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 70 18. Although the pro ponents seem to have undertaken extensive field investigation of the soil and subsurface condition, through base hole test along the alignment of the project and generally on the side of the road, and about 5 -meter from the cent re line, and it is claimed that standard penetration tests were used to determine the compactness/density of the soil , and that silty clay and clayey silt upto 6 -8 meters in depth , and thereaft er silty sand and sandy silt have been found , and further that Lahore ’s soil is generally silty clay and claye y silt, however, no geotechnical investigations were carried out between the track alignment and the monuments or around the monuments which would have been more prudent and appropriate for achieving precision, more so for the reason that no verification, by any geologist, has been submitted to support the claim that there shall be absolutely no material variation in the nature, properties, qualitie s and characteristics of the different strata of the soil an d the other relevant components contiguous to and around the monument s. 19.

[277] As is well known the vibration amplitude reduces as it propagates from the source to the receiver. The larger the dista nce, the lesser the amplitude. In the present case, there are two different sources of vibration, one is the operation/deployment of the construction machinery/ equipment , during the construction phase , and the other would be the transit of train during the operational phase.

[278] Construction machinery, as can be seen from the photographs at page 8 of CMA No. in CA , operates from and is deployed upto the point well beyond the viaduct piers , and beyond the raft in the elevated section, and are so deployed upto the point beyond the edge of the trench for the tunnel/box of the cut and cover section.

[279] Whereas the train transit Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 71 induced vibration is transmitted into the soil and propagates towards the monuments , from the raft of the pier, and from th e edge of the cover/roof slab of the cut and cover tunnel/box, as the medium through which the vibration is transmitted beyond the train track changes from that of the viaduct and cut and cover systems , respectively, into the contiguous soil at these two p oints.

[280] Therefore the closest point for the vibration source for the monument s during construction i s the edge of the trench of the raft , and the edge of the top/roof slab of the cut and cover tunnel/box . Certainly the source of vibration must be calculated from the point of origin of the energy. However, the distance for calculating/evaluating the level of vibration for the construction phase has, in respect of elevated viaduct system, been taken from the middle line of the width of the pier, instead of the edge of the trench of the raft, and for the cut and cover section, it has been taken from the edge of the cover/roof slab of the subway tunnel/box , instead of the edge of the trench of the cut and cover tunnel.

[281] Thus the NESPAK measurements of the viaduct system refers to the distance in between the middle of the viaduct piers and the monument wall, whereas the actual distance is 6.43 meters (21 feet) closer to the monument then stated by NESPAK, and verified by TYPSA Asia. This additional /excessive distanc e of 6.43 meters (21 feet) has been calculated by taking into account the distance between the middle line of the pier and the edge of the raft/pile cap, being 5.4 meters (17.8 feet), plus the distance between the edge of the raft/pile cap and the edge of the trench dug for the raft/pile cap.

[282] Similarly, by ignoring the distance between the edge of the roof/top slab of the cut and cover trench/box and the edge of the tunnel trench, NESPAK has taken into account an additional Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 72 distance of 4.82 meters (15.81 ft .) in respect of the cut and cover section.

[283] Both the above additional /excessive distance s/calculat ions are clearly demonstrated through photographs at pages 3 and 4 of the presentation submitted by Mr. Kamil Khan Mumtaz , and thus the level/amplitude of vib ration received or to be received by the monuments has been calculated on the basis of distances greater than the actual, and cannot, therefore, be relied upon. 20.

[284] The calculation suffers from another inadequacy/inaccuracy as the size, shape and extent of the foundations of the monuments have not been discovered and have thus not been taken into account while calculating the relevant distance . Possibility of the footing s/foundation s setting of the monuments spreading/existing beyond the visible structure of the monument s, bringing the monuments still closer to the Project site cannot therefore be ruled out . 21.

[285] As noted earlier neither have the structure s of the monuments been examined , or assessed nor is any structural resilience data thereof available, however, from the record of the present case, it can well be seen that the monuments, especially the protected heritage amongst those , are quite old in age.

[286] Atleast three (3) of the antiquities are more than three hundred and seventy years (370 years) old . Some of the monuments , as recorded by Dr. Pamela Rogers , have suffered structural instability and have also developed signs of stress, cracks and neglect. However, NESPAK in determining the vibration impact tolerance level of the monuments , have applied a threshold value of 3 mm/s which is prescribed by German Standard DIN 4150 -3 for “buildings of great intrinsic value”.

[287] Whereas, as noted by structural engineer , Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 73 Muhammad Khalil Rehman in his note dated 05.1.2017, (annexure ‘D’ to CMA No. in CA 21 ), the technical advisory note TAV -04-01-R020 at page 17 of the CALTRAN manual states that there is a real possibility of structural damage to historical buildings and buildings in poor condition by transit of a train from within 15 meters (50 ft to 100 ft) there of.

[288] It may be noted that it is in fact the CALTRAN standard that has been app lied by NESPAK in relation to the construction machinery/equipment in this case. However, for monuments/heritage buildings it has used DIN Standard instead, which , as noted above , prescribes the threshold limit in respect of “Building of Great Intrinsic Value” and no t for “heritage building ”, for closer to which category , it is CALTRAN which prescribes a tolerance level of 2mm/s (0.08/s) , under the description ‘ancien t monuments or ruins”. 22.

[289] A reference to the following passage s from a research study/paper in relation to ‘Metro Train induced vibration on historic building in Changu, China” published in a journal of Zhenjiang University – Science A (Applied Physic an d Engineering) also may be relevant in the present context . “Generally, it is extremely rare for vibrations from train operations to cause any sort of building damage, even minor cosmetic damage (Heckl et al ., 1996).

[290] However, there is sometimes a concern r egarding long -term vibration effects on historic buildings located near the subway lines. Traffic vibrations are usually low, but lasting, which could lead to potential damage, like building material fatigue and foundation settlement to historic buildings. For structures that have suffered from weathering, desquamation, or have cracks, even low velocities could give Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 74 rise to fatigue damage with frequent occurrences.” “For modern steel structures or reinforced structures, it is believed that a PPV lower than 10 mm/s will rarely cause any sort of building damage.

[291] For historic buildings and memorials, the criteria are usually stricter, from 3 to 10 mm/s PPV, depending on local codes, which are summarized by Ma et al. (2009). Numerous measurements show that typic al ground vibration levels from underground tunnels lie in the range of 0.05 –1.00 mm/s, lower than the values in the codes mentioned above, but the re remains the possibility of damages to historic buildings.

[292] That is, the PPVs between 3 and 10 mm/s do not g enerally consider architectural damage, but rather structural damage.” “The Chinese National Code (GB/T 50452 -2008) gives a criterion of 0.10 –0.75 mm/s, which is now one of the strictest allowable values in the world and could be used to evaluate architect ural damage .

[293] In this code, the fatigue limit is used to fix the allowable velocities. When the cyclic stress is lower than the limit, the materials and structures are unlikely to be destroyed by fatigue. In this case study, for the brick -masonry structure listed as a State Protected Historic Site, the allowable horizontal PPV at the top of the monument is 0.15–0.25 mm/s, according to GB/T 50452 -2008 . 23.

[294] With the various inaccuracies, inadequacies , anomalies and lacunas as discussed in paras 17 to 21 here inabove, the safe distance from the project alignment to the monuments, as mentioned by Dr. Pamela Rogers is thirty two feets (32 ft.), but the Supreme Court Registry Building, Saint Andrew Church and Mauj Daraya Darbar are situated at much shorter distanc es.

[295] Whereas the Lakshmi building lies just outside the said limit, which monument, Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 75 according to her, is already in a fragile state of existence. The monuments have thus been rendered unsafe by the proposed construction of the project , even as per Dr. Roger s calculations . 24.

[296] The Mughal era hydraulic tank near the entrance of the Shalamar Garden, which is integral part of the Garden is, according to Dr. Rogers, very close to the alignment of the viaduct, and will in fact be partially underneath the viaduct and is particularly at risk. The continuous low level vibration from the Train transit, in the opinion of Dr.

[297] Rogers, may cause structural damage to the existing fabric, which opinion is in consonance with the opinion expressed by a study published by Zhen jiang University reproduced at page 16 hereof. It is also crucial to note that the cumulative effect of the various construction machineries operating simultaneously has also not been taken into account, which may have a serious bearing in fixing the level of vibration. 25.

[298] A further anomaly in the NESPAK report is that the peak acceleration and peak velocities (vibration) for Supreme Court and St. Andrew Church buildings are given as less than such value of Mauj Darya Darbar , even though the distances o f construction/operation point(s) for Mauj Darya Darbar is given greater than s uch distance f or that of the Supreme Court building. 26.

[299] As noted earlier, the definition of the physical mechanism that generat es vibration is the foremost component , and the most crucial factor for the study /analysis and evaluation of vibration. In the present case such physical mechanism is a train , said to be a “Chinese standard BI train”. It may also be recalled that the specifications like unsprung mass , distance between a xles, primary suspension and stiffness of the suspension , of the vehicle are the most relevant , and crucial specification s/information for Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 76 evaluating the transit induced vibration.

[300] However, despite request from TYPSA Asia, data regarding the unsprung mass and the dynamic stiffness of the relevant elements was not furnished to them. It was because of lack of information that many specifications and detail s were assumed to be similar to a model used in a study/paper known as XIA.H.Zhang.

[301] N, which was feed by NESPAK in the Structural Analysis Computer Program, SAP2000, to simulate the excitation of the Metro train as supposedly being compati ble to “Chinese standard BI train” . However absolutely no information has been laid , and no explanation submitted before u s, as to the basis of the assumed compatibility between the said train and the XIA model and therefore, it cannot be said with any certainty that the specification values and configuration used to assess and evaluate the amplitude of the vibration generate d by the subject train are in fact the same as that of the XIA model train, relevant details of which model also have not been placed before us and the result thus achieved cannot be sanctified by this Court. 27.

[302] It may be relevant to observe here that Ty psa-Asia who were appointed as experts to verify the credibility of the Nespak reports, have in their report proceeded to endorse the Nespak reports without analysing the same properly and by ignoring the various deficiencies, discrepancies, inadequacies a nd anomalies therein, as discussed in detail hereinbefore.

[303] It can also be seen from the Typsa’s report that certain very crucial information and details sought by Typsa from Nespak were either not provided or where provided were incomplete or inadequate, a nd as acknowledged in the report itself, in respect of some issues, Typsa had to proceed on assumptions.

[304] Typsa’s report is therefore of no avail in the matter. Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 77 28. As discussed in detail in the following passages from a World Bank publication titled, “The Economic of Uniqueness, investing in historic city cores and cultural heritage assets for sustainable development”, which is a collection of research papers authored by leading scholars and practitioners in heritage economics.

[305] It is now well recognised th at “heritage is a public good”, and “yields public good benefits”. It provides “crucially needed continuity and stability”, helps in “poverty alleviation” and that heritage “anchors people to their roots, builds self esteem and restores dignity”, and serve s as a “driver of local economic development and prosperity”.

[306] Heritage “might deteriorate or depreciate if not maintained and impose on the present generation a duty of care so they can be handed to future generation”. “The positive influence of cultural h eritage on liveability, economic growth and local economic development is also now well established. Whereas undoubtedly liveability is not a middle class luxury.

[307] It is an economic imperative: “In a world where more than half of the population now lives in cities and more than ninety 90 percent (90%) of urban growth occurs in the developing world, cities try hard to modernize without losing their unique character, embodied in their historic cores and heritage assets .

[308] As cities expand rapidly, conservation and continued use of heritage can provide crucially needed continuity and stability . In other words, the past can become a foundation for the future” . “Cities that are the most successful at attracting investment and businesses to meet the aspirations of their citizens, while alleviating poverty and promoting inclusion are those that harness all of their resources, including their Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 78 heritage .

[309] In addition, heritage anchors people to their roots, builds self -esteem, and restores dignity. Identity matters to al l vibrant cities and all people” . “Heritage is a public good and the economic justification for public sector investment is well established” . “The good news is that there is an increasing trend toward financing projects aimed at conserving and incorpora ting heritage into development strategies .

[310] All countries , developed and developing, are indeed investing more into conserving their city cores and heritage , with projects focusing particularly on landmarks and other major assets”. “In economics, heritage can be seen as an asset , with the theoretical basis in capital theory. The concept of capital has then been extended into the field of culture and heritage , with the definition of cultural capital”. “Like any other form of capital, both cultural and natur al capital have been inherited from the past, might deteriorate or depreciate if not maintained , and impose on the present generation a duty of care so they can be handed down to future generations” . “It is widely acknowledged that heritage has a value t o the community in which it is located.

[311] Among the resources that these cities need to harness are their heritage assets, which are unique features that differentiate them from other cities” . “Tourism has emerged as one of the fastest - growing sectors of th e world economy . The average growth of tourism arrivals, as the world economy recovers, is likely to continue to grow in the decades to come.

[312] This is especially due to Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 79 growing interest in visiting and enjoying vibrant cities and heritage assets” . “Tourism , by virtue of being a labour intensive activity, can allow the large pool of unemployed and underemployed individuals in developing countries to get jobs and in turn create the conditions for a sustained and broad -based growth”. “Tourism has spill over eff ects in other economic sectors: the foreign direct investment associated with it can in fact bring managerial skills and technology with potential benefits to other sectors.

[313] Policies designed to foster tourism ………… can enhance growth in other sectors and d istribute wealth more widely”. “Investment in heritage was driven by the need to conserve and upgrade specific endangered assets in the phase of rapid urbanization , and to prevent and mitigate the possible adverse impacts of large infrastructural projects” . “Heritage yields public good benefits that can be classified in the same ways as environmental non-market benefits”. “This book takes inspiration from Nobel Prize Laureate Robert Merton Solow’s quotation : “Over the long term, places with strong, distinc tive identities are more likely to prosper than places without them.

[314] Every place must identify its strongest, most distinctive features and develop them or run the risk of being all things to all persons and nothing special to any. […] Liveability is not a middle -class luxury. It is an economic imperative. ” “The positive influence of cultural heritage on liveability, economic growth, and local economic development has been increasingly studied and discussed in the last few decades” .

[315] Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 80 “Historic city cores and their cultural heritage assets can have an effective role in differentiating a city from its competitors and in improving liveability and attractiveness”. “In a context of rapid urbanization, old cities struggle to modernize without completely losing their character.

[316] In the absence of a strategic public intervention to steer their transformation, many of them simply drift into a haphazard mix of demolition, new construction, and building upgrading ……………………… The level of economic activity these cities can s ustain typically increases, sometimes substantially, but in the process these places also lose their distinctive traits and become less liveable .

[317] This is not merely a concern of culture -loving intellectuals in the rich world, who may be too privileged to f ully value the benefits of rapid urbanization. In many cases, the inhabitants of these cities also regret the loss of a sense of place and the disappearance of the physical markers of their identity” . “The frantic transformation of centuries -old Asian cities into soulless agglomerations of generic architecture is an obvious illustration of this trend.

[318] Moreover, there is an element of irreversibility in transformations of this kind , as recovering what was lost is enormously more expensive than it would have been to preserve it in the first place ”. “Admittedly, there is also an increasing trend toward financing heritage projects, aimed at protecting and restoring unique buildings or architectural ensembles ”. 29.

[319] Heritage has to be preserved and protected in all respects, all of it virtue, qualities, facets and characteristics are to be secured from all kinds of harms, including impairment of its visual integrity. According to Dr. Pamela Rogers, t he concept of visual Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 81 integrity is frequently considered cruci al in relation to the preservation of a heritage sites.

[320] Visual integrity may pertain specifically to vistas, panoramas, viewpoints, and silhouettes. Visual Integrity can also be taken to mean the capacity of a heritage to maintain its visual distinctivenes s, and to visually demonstrate its relationship with its surroundings. 30. The importance of and significance attached to the protection of important views, and their contribution, and relevance in building an image for a historic town, and also in prom oting the welfare of the people, can be well appreciated from the following passage of a research paper: “Preservation of the character of historic towns and mitigating the impacts of new development has been a challenging task for spatial planning authori ties throughout the world.

[321] In preserving the character of historic towns, protection of important views of heritage buildings and landmarks plays an important role . Most of these heritage buildings strongly contribute in forming an image for the historic t own . The existence of such views, often containing well known cherished landmarks and landscapes, enriches our daily lives , attracts tourist and helps our communities prosper . “Views play an important part in shaping our appreciation and understanding of h istoric environment, in towns and cities and in the countryside.

[322] Some views are designed to be seen as a unity, more commonly; a significant view is a historical composite, the cumulative result of a long history ”. 31. It may, in the above context , be be neficial also to reproduce certain extracts from an article authored by Leo Hollis , titled “How are protected views shaping cities” quoted in the Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 82 impugned judgment , as being reflective of the emphasis that the city planner s put on protected views in order to preserve the fundamental s of a city and to protect the character of the landscape that characterizes the features of that city , and also the emphasis laid on the significance attributed to preserving such views, as follows: - "In recent months, the cou ncil has been responding to widespread concerns that the city of "dreaming spires" was about to be swamped by a rash of tall new buildings.

[323] As a result, alongside English Heritage and other agencies, the council has devised policies that create a series of protected views, triangular sections that cut across the map in order to preserve the vertical skyline of the city." "A section of city panoramas from particular points of historic or local interest have been protected, taking in , not just individual hist orical buildings , but also the topography, the city as a landscape of natural features, variegated heights and forms, combining into a pleasing image…" "…Since the 1960s, different city governments have looked at the preservation of views as a way of contr olling the shape, in particular the vertical outline, of cities.

[324] How tall should a building be and where should it fit in? Are skyscrapers only for downtown? What kind of building - office, monument, and apartment block - should be allowed to rise int o the sky? What can it obscure and what must it not overshadow?" "…For some, cities are changing too fast and in the wrong places.

[325] They are losing their character and being replaced by a ubiquitous glass and steel architecture that offers no sense of locat ion. Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 83 Tall towers are replacing the human scale of the city's heritage." "…Protected views are ways of managing change: restricting growth in some parts, ring - fencing and preserving the significant aspects.

[326] It prioritizes the ocular encounter with the cit y. The metropolis must "look right to be right." "…there was public concern about the "Manhattanisation" of the financial district of San Francisco that many people thought would damage the "city pattern". This was developed into a general plan passed into law in 1995, including the preservation of "major views whenever it is feasible, with special attention to the characteristic views of open space and water that reflect the natural setting of the city and give a colorful and refreshing contrast to man's d evelopment." "For example, are protected views the best way to preserve the heritage of the city?

[327] The 2006 Street View study conducted by Edinburgh city council noted some places were "fundamental" to the city, and key views were "precious" and even "sacro sanct" in providing a "sense of the city". 32. In the case of Penn Central Transportation Co. v. City of New York 438 U.S.104 (1978) , the U.S.

[328] Supreme Court whilst upholding the decision of the New York City’s landmark Preservation Commission , deny ing permission to construct an office tower on top of the Grand Central Terminal, a railroad station in midtown Manhattan , endorsed the governmental restriction on historic building, and upheld the historic preservation as a legitimate governmental objective.

[329] Th e Court also sanctified the preservation programs around the country by upholding New York City’s historic Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 84 preservation laws, which restricted changes to the property designated landmarks and historic preservation. 33. The judgment recognized the fact tha t the municipal laws to encourage or require preservation of the heritage building were enacted in the back drop of the historic building being destroyed as the same were not being valued as much as those ought to have been, and also without exploring the possibility of preserving them, and in view of a widely shared belief that the heritage building enhance the quality of life for all and serve as an example of quality for today , thus it was observed that: "Over the past 50 years, all 50 States and over 50 0 municipalities have enacted laws to encourage or require the preservation of buildings and areas with historic or aesthetic importance.

[330] These nationwide legislative efforts have been precipitated by two concerns. The first is recognition that, in recent years, large numbers of historic structures, landmarks, and areas have been destroyed without adequate consideration of either the values represented therein or the possibility of preserving the destroyed properties for use in economically productive ways.

[331] The second is a widely shared belief that structures with special historic, cultural, or architectural significance enhance the quality of life for all. Not only do these buildings and their workmanship represent the lessons of the past and embody preciou s features of our heritage, they serve as examples of quality for today. “Historic conservation is but one aspect of the much larger problem, basically an environmental one, of enhancing - or perhaps developing for the first time - the quality of life for people. " Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 85 34.

[332] The conclusion drawn by the Commission was approved by the U.S. Supreme Court in the following words: - "Landmarks cannot be divested from their setting ……..………………….. and we must preserve them in a meaningful way - with alterations and additi ons of such character, scale, materials and mass as will protect, enhance and perpetuate the original design rather than overwhelm it ." 35.

[333] In the case of South Lakeland District Council v. Secretary of State for the Environment [1992] 2 Advisory Commit tee 141, his Lord Justice Bridge observed , that: "Was it the Parliament's intention that the decision -maker should consider very carefully whether a proposed development would harm the setting of the listed building (or the character or appearance of the c onservation area), and if the conclusion was that there would be some harm, then consider whether that harm was outweighed by the advantages of the proposal, giving that harm such weight as the decision - maker thought appropriate; or was it Parliament's intention that when deciding whether the harm to the setting of the listed building was outweighed by the advantages of the proposal, the decision -maker should give particular weight to the desirability of avoiding such harm ?

[334] And that “there is no dispute th at the intention of section [72(1)] is that planning decisions in respect of development proposed to be carried out in a conservation area must give a high priority to the objective of preserving or enhancing the character or appearance of the area . If any proposed development would conflict with that objective, there will be a strong presumption against the grant of planning permission, though, Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 86 no doubt, in exceptional cases the presumption may be overridden in favour of development which is desirable on t he ground of some other public interest. 36.

[335] Similar views were expressed in the case of Hetherington (UK) Ltd. v. Secretary of State for the Environment [1996] 69. P & CR. 874 . 37. In the case of Barnwell Manor Wind Energy Ltd. v. East Northamptonshi re District Council etc. [2014] EWCA Civ 137 , in an appeal against the order quashing the decision of a Planning Inspector, whereby the former granted planning permission for a four-turbine wind farm on land north of Catshead Woods, Northamptonshire , in the face of section 66 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, which required that the planning authority, while considering as to whether or not grant planning permission for development which affects a listed building or its se tting, shall have special regard to the desirability of preserving the building or its setting or any features of special architectural or historic interest which it possesses, and in dealing with the question as to what extent the visible presence of turb ine proposed to be erected in the wind farm site (which was around 1.3 KM from the boundary of the registered park and 1.7 KM from the New Beild itself ), would affect the significance of the heritage assets concerned , the inspector observed that the tribun e array would not intrude on any obviously intended planned view out of the garden or from the garden lodge , as in his view, a reasonable observer would know that the turbine array was a modern addition to the landscape, separate from the planned historic landscape or building they were within , or considering or interpreting , and thus Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 87 held that the presence of the wind turbine array would not be so distracting that it would prevent or make unduly difficult, an understanding, appreciation or interpretation o f the significance of the elements that make up Lyveden New Bield and Lyveden Old Bield, or their relationship to each other.

[336] And therefore , the effect on the setting of these designated heritage assets would not reach the level of substantial harm. 38. His Lordship of the Court of appeal, referring to South Lake and Hetherington (UK) Ltd. (supra) with approval, proceeded to observe that: "…In my view, Glidewell LJ's judgment is authority for the proposition that a finding of harm to the setting of a listed building is a consideration to which the decision -maker must give "considerable importance and weight." And also "That conclusion is reinforced by the passage in the speech of Lord Bridge in South Lakeland to which I have referred (paragraph 20 abov e).

[337] It is true, as Mr. Nardell submits, that the ratio of that decision is that "preserve" means do no harm". However, Lord Bridge's explanation of the statutory purpose is highly persuasive, and his observation that there will be a "strong presumption" ag ainst granting permission for development that would harm the character or appearance of a conservation area is consistent with Glidewell LJ's conclusion in Bath.

[338] There is a "strong presumption" against granting planning permission for development which wo uld harm the character or appearance of a conservation area precisely because the desirability of preserving the character or appearance of the area is a consideration of "considerable importance and weight ." Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 88 39.

[339] Discussing the decision of Ouseley J. in Garner v. Elmbridge Borough Council [2014] EWCA Civ 891 , His Lordship observed: "…Garner is an example of the practical application of the advice in policy HE9.1: that substantial harm to designated heritage assets of the highest significance should not me rely be exceptional, but "wholly exceptional ".

[340] And concluded that: "For the reason I agree with Lang J’s conclusion that Parliament's intention in enacting section 66(1) was that decision -makers should give "considerable importance and weight" to the desirability of preserving the setting of listed buildings when carrying out the balancing exercise :” And that “the Inspector did not give considerable importance and weight to this factor when carrying out the balancing exercise in this decision.

[341] He appears to have treated the less than substantial harm to the setting of the listed buildings, including Lyveden New Bield, as a less than substantial objection to the grant of planning permission. The Appellant's Skeleton Argument effectively conceded as much in contending that the weight to be given to this factor was, subject only to irrationality , entirely a matter for the Inspector's planning judgment.

[342] In his oral submissions Mr. Nardell contended that the Inspector had given considerable weight to this factor , but he was unable to point to any particular passage in the decision letter which supported this contention, and there is a marked contrast between the "significant weight" which the Inspector expressly gave in paragraph 85 of the decision letter to the renewable energy considerations in favour of the proposal having regard to the policy advice in PPS22, and the Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 89 manner in which he approached the section 66(1) du ly.

[343] It is true that the Inspector set out the duty in paragraph 17 of the decision letter, but at no stage in the decision letter did he expressly acknowledge the need, if he found that there would be harm to the setting of the many listed buildings, to give considerable weight to the desirability of preserving the setting of those buildings.

[344] This i s a fatal flaw in the decision even if grounds 2 and 3 are not made out." 40. In North Norfolk District Council v Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government etc. [2014] EWHC 279 (Admin) , High Court of Justice, Queen's Bench Division where wind turbine was to be erected in open countryside on the side of Cromer Ridge, which is one of the highest points in North Norfolk with implications both for visibility and for wind performance .

[345] There were a number of listed buildings in the area. The appli cation for planning permission was revised by the Council on the ground of its impact on landscape and heritage assets. The High Court of Justice, Queen’s Bench Division , proceeded to hold as follows: "But the question remains whether in substance he did h ave that special regard to the desirability of preserving the settings of the heritage assets as part of the consideration that led to his decision , notwithstanding that, as I find, in approaching that question he did not expressly have regard to the statu tory requirement as such.

[346] In approaching that question I remind myself of the helpful guidance in Garner that it is not necessary for the decision maker to pass through a particular series of legal hoops to comply with Section 66(1) nor, I would add, does he have to recite any particular mantra or form of words to demonstrate that he has done so.

[347] However, Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 90 adopting the formulation of Mr Justice Ouseley approved by the Court of Appeal in Garner, that does not mean that the decision maker can "treat the desira bility of preserving the setting of a listed building as a mere material consideration to which (he) can simply attach the weight (he) sees fit in (his) judgment.

[348] The statutory language goes beyond that and treats the preservation of the setting of a liste d building as presumptively desirable. So, if a development would harm the setting of a listed building, there has to be something of sufficient strength in the merits of the development to outweigh that harm.

[349] The language of presumption against permission or strong countervailing reasons for its grant is appropriate . It is an obvious consequence of the statutory language rather than an illegitimate substance for it." "…However, the problem that it faces is that, on the conclusion to which I have come, the inspector did not in fact have regard to the statutory duty but applied a simple balancing exercise under paragraph 134 of the NPPF.

[350] In the particular circumstances of this decision it is not possible to know how the balance would or might have been affect ed if he had special regard to the desirability of the preservation of the settings in accordance with the approach helpfully summarized in Garner and set out in the other authorities to which I have referred." 41.

[351] Perusal of the following passage from Binay Kumar Mishra v State of Behar and others (AIR 2001 Patna 148) , may also be relevant: "It needs no emphasis to mention that protection and preservation of our cultural property against the dangers of damage and destruction resulting from theft, vandali sm, clandestine excavations Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 91 and illicit traffic is our sacred duty, which we owe to posterity.

[352] Cultural heritage along with environment is very essential to the well being and to the enjoyment of man's basic rights - even the right to life itself. This just ifies on the statute book, the aforesaid legislations aimed at taking all possible measures to stop the impoverishment of the cultural heritage.

[353] The concern for protection of such heritage is not limited to India. Governments of most of the countries in th e world today are addressing themselves to this problem. The entire humanity is anxious about it…" 42. The famous Taj Mehal case , reported as (1997) 2 SCC 353, which was a watershed case of supervision done by the Supreme Court of India for three long y ears culminat ing into passing of orders whereby the industries situated within the Taj Trapezium Zone and emitting pollution by the use of Coal as fuel and causing damage to the Taj Mehal were ordered to be dealt with in a certain manner.

[354] The Court also ap pointed a n expert committee , who’s report along with other reports of the committees were considered by the Court before rendered the final judgment. The expert advice through UNESCO was also sought . The case is significant for its rulings that the objecti ve behind the litigation was to stop pollution while encouraging development of industry.

[355] It was held that sustainable development was the answer. In the final analysis the industries were directed to change over to natural gas as an industrial fuel. Other industries were directed to be relocated to other industrial areas . 43. In EMCA Construction Co. v. Archaeological Survey of India and others , (2009) 113 DRJ 446 , the learned Delhi High Court upheld the interim order passed by the court below , and direct ed Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 92 the Central Government to remove the structures within 100 meters of the Humayun's Tomb. 44.

[356] As highlighted in the following passage from an authenticated professional study/research paper, visual assessment study and visual impact study have now beco me, integral and significant part of designing and planning process, whereas view scope analysis, and view protection are of crucial importance to the discipline of visual assessment and impact study: “The importance of visual assessment study in urban an alysis has long been recognized.

[357] The construction of the city of Rome and early Italian hill-towns have been influenced by established lines of sight (Bacon, E.1967), and the planned development of visually prominent locations. The visual impact studies ha ve now become part of urban design and planning process. Several cities throughout world conduct similar studies related to view scope analysis and view protection (for example, London View Management Framework, 2010; Seattle View Protection Policy, 2001) ”. 45.

[358] The following passage may also be relevant to the present discussion: “In the Indian context studies and research specifically focusing on views of historic landmarks and their preservation were not given importance. But there is a need for such r esearch to protect the views of large number of our ancient monuments, which are constantly threatened by the surrounding urban development which obscure the traditionally enjoyed views .” 46.

[359] Dilating upon the approach, object and the purpose of visual i mpact assessment , and the essential requirements , scope Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 93 and parameters of the study , it is stated that “The assessment process aims to be objective and to quantify effects as far as possible. However, it is recognized that subjective judgment is appropriat e.

[360] If it is based upon training and experience, and supported by clear evidence, reasoned argument and informed opinion . Whilst changes to a view can be factually defined, the evaluation of townscape and visual amenity does require qualitative judgments on the significance of effects to be made. The conclusions of this assessment therefore combine systematic observation and measurement with informed professional interpretation ”. 47.

[361] For the purpose of Viewscape Assessment for Protecting the Views of Monume nts, it is found “ important to study the visual relationship between sacred monuments and places from where the views are available, so as to identify the most important views for protection ”. 48. The results of the study demonstrate the method for asses sment of views so as to identify the significant viewscapes for preservation and enhancement. 49.

[362] In order to protect the important views, it was found necessary to assess the factors which affect the quality of views , and the quality of place from where the view is available and to examine the following attributes of the view scope. (a) Visibility of the monument; (b) Classification of view, based on distance; (c) Type of view; (d) Dominance in skyline; (e) Background and Foreground of the viewing plane; (f) Obstruction Typ e.

[363] In case of the viewing place , the relevant attributes being: a) Type of viewing place; b) Place characteristics of the view point, i.e., Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 94 i. location, ii. assessment view point, iii. place elevation, iv. activities, v. land use, vi. general ambience, and, vii. potential view ers. 50.

[364] Using the methodological View Assessment Framework, it was found that significance of views varies according to the location, visibility, quality of view, quality of viewpoint, view type, etc. Among the variety of criteria used for assessing the view significance , the visibility of structure, its dominance in the skyline and type of view has more weightage than the others .

[365] The visibility of the structure is graded, based on the percentage of visibility in a three point scale as Highly Visible, Mo derately Visible and Poorly Visible . In classifying the view based on distance, most of the panoramic views are distant views . Among the various types of views, the street end view gains significance due to its spatial configuration . ………… Most of the stree t end views can be appreciated under the immediate and intermediate view ranges. 51.

[366] This study not only classifies the significant views, viewpoints, visual corridors which need to be protected but also identifies the obstructing elements which need to be removed from the viewscape. The study has also revealed that the characteristics of the viewing place have very little influence on the significance of the view.

[367] Even if the general ambience of the viewing place is poor, it is still appreciated and freq uented if the point offers the best view available. However, improving such view places will enhance the viewing experience. 52. In her HIA report Dr. Pamela Rogers has described the concept of visual integrity as crucial to the p reservation of a heritage sites.

[368] She states that ‘Visual integrity” may pertain Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 95 specifically to vistas, panoram as, viewpoints, and silhouettes, and describes the Visual Integrity as the capacity of a heritage to maintain its visual distinctiveness , and to visually demonstrate its relationship with its surroundings. 53.

[369] In relation to the OLMT project she submits that “ Two points are of importance in assessing visual impacts; firstly, the height of the elevated track in relation to the view -lines to and from the heritage sites, a nd secondly, of the current Visual Character of the heritage site in its setting. This refers to the value and character of existing views of Sensitive Receivers within the visual envelope (the area where views and viewers may be affected, the area within which the proposed development is wholly or partly visible to the visual receivers) . 54.

[370] Amongst the four key potential impacts on the subject heritage as identified in Dr. Rogers HIA report, are Visual barriers and intrusions created by the viaduct . Dr. Rogers claims that the various potential impacts identified in the report, can bear directly on the significance of the heritage buildings.

[371] As an illustration she submits that a direct line between a visitor to Ziab -un-Nisa Tomb upwards towards the elevate d track may imply strong negative impact . She opined that the nature of an elevated viaduct design inevitably creates residual impacts that cannot be fully mitigated . As regards Chouburji, she states that much of the significance of the said monument lies in its value as a highly visible icon of the city of Lahore, and that the setting of the building will be directly impacted and will require reinstatement .

[372] Though she states that visibility of the Shalimar Garden to a passerby as a landmark will not be imp acted by the operation of the train, as by definition the garden within its peripheral wall is inward looking, she however Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 96 points out that the elevated viaduct shall cause visual intrusion from the upper terrace of the garden which may have impact on its significance.

[373] In her assessment the visual impact of the project on Chouburji shall be “very high”, whereas in respect of Shalimar Garden, Ghullabi Bagh gateway, Budhu Ka Awa and Lakshmi building it shall be “high” , and the impact in respect of GPO, Aiwan - e-Auqaf and Zaibun Nisa Tomb shall be “medium”. Such impact in respect of Supreme Court, Branch Registry, Saint Andrew Church and Mauj Darya Darbar has been assessed by her as “low”. 55.

[374] According to her, threat to the significance to Gulabi Bagh gateway f rom the impact of the elevated viaduct shall be by way of visual intrusion. Regarding Chouburji, she further states that the operational phase impact thereon shall primarily be by way of visual impairment . 56. Amongst the various attributes of the relevan t monuments recognized by Dr.

[375] Rogers as carrying their significance, is the monuments visibility to a passerby as a landmark. 57. Dr. Roger states that “ Deciding on the acceptability of impacts requires a professional value judgment about the severity and importance of a case ” and that “ The impact is acceptable if the assessment indicates that there will be no significant effects on the fabric, setting or values of a heritage place or on the function or performance of intangible heritage ”.

[376] According to he r, “the impact is unacceptable if the adverse effects are considered too excessive and are unable to mitigate practically ” and that “t he impact is undetermined if significant adverse effects are likely, but the extent to which they may occur or may be miti gated cannot be determined from the study , further detailed study will be required ”.

[377] She however states that the “existing impacts, need to be factored Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 97 into the assessment of potential additional impacts from any proposed development or action”. Though she envisages two different, rather conflicting, scenario, one where the new development, because of the earlier changes, may have a limited effect, and the other, where it may worsen the situation further by adding to and joining the earlier impairment, she however does not prescribe any criteria and/or explain the phenomenon for the said two conflicting scenarios in the stated situation. 58.

[378] She however has found the impacts acceptable, purportedly for three different reasons, the first being the existing impairment. The second being, her view that the impact can be mitigated, and the third, that the benefits of OLMT project to public overweigh its harm to the monuments. We find the above analysis and stances as misconceived and untenable.

[379] In the first plac e, as noted above, no reason or explanation has been given in the report, as to why the impact of the project will not worsen the situation and will rather be mild, although as noted above, according to her the situation may assume either of the two. She has also not analyzed and evaluated the level of the existing impact, in a scientific and detailed manner (the manner, approach and methodology for such exercise has been discussed in the earlier part of the judgment).

[380] We find it crucial to observe here tha t the approach in relation to heritage should be that its view must not be made worse even when it has suffered any past apathy , as even if the general ambience of the viewing place is poor, it may still be frequated and appreciated as being the best view available.

[381] There can hardly be any qualm about the suggestion that efforts should be made to improve the existing view rather than deteriorating it further. Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 98 59. It is crucial to note that it is no body’s case that there exist any previous intrusion or ob struction directly in front of any of the monuments blocking or impairing the front view or the façade thereof.

[382] Whereas the elevated viaduct is being constructed not only within the 200 ft. protective/ buffer zone, and in close proximity to the monuments, but is being built right in front of the monuments, with 2300 mm diameter, supporting piers within 30m of each other throughout the length of the viaduct, which admittedly will cause visual intrusion, break the view line, and grossly overwhelm the monument .

[383] It is crucial to keep in mind, as noted above, that some other obstructions which may presently be existing in the shape of some over grown trees, encroachments, illegal/unauthorized construction , signages, hoarding s, roof projections , etc. (which may be impairing some view, of some monuments, to some extent, and some of which obstructions may not be of permanent nature, or could be removed, or be amenable to correction), certainly do not exist right in front of the monument and don’t obstruct, overwhelm, eclipse and/or temper their view as will the viaduct system.

[384] It may be observed that the piers of the viaduct at some points and from certain angles may possibility block almost the entire view of the monument and that for someone moving in an automobile , the pier may prove far more obstructive than for those not riding such transport. As regards the view from the Metro Train, it may be observed that it will be available to only those few amongst its passengers who will be sitting along the windows, looki ng over the monuments, and that their view too would be very limited and restricted, as because of more than 12m height and a close distance, (which distance, it may be noted will be shorter than the distance between the raft of the viaduct and the monumen t Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 99 because of the largely extended arms of the transom s), and also because of the posture of the passengers, only some portion of the monuments excluding much of it façade shall be visible, and that too they will not be able to enjoy and appreciate properly because of the speed of the moving train.

[385] As regards the contention that the Shalamar Gardens being inward looking, the viaduct will harm the visual impact from the Garden and not towards it, it may be observed that it is the whole complex of the “Shalama r Gardens” that presents a visual experience and pleasure, including its walls gates, and other components, which clearly, rather mainly falls within its visual envelope, form an integral part of the monument, and are essential components of the majes tic ambience and aura of the complex, and undoubtedly the view and the visual impact of these features of the complex shall be obstructed and impaired by the elevated viaduct.

[386] However, as to whether or not the effect of visual impairment in relation to th ese features would be of a tolerable nature would be a value judgment to be made by some independent, reputable and credible professional in the field. 60. The so called mitigating measures suggested in the report by way of “improved exterior landscaping” , “sympathetic design”, “greening of the structure”, “design and public art opportunities” besides being of generic nature, would hardly work to mitigate the admitted adverse impacts and, may we respectfully say, are in fact wholly inconsequential and irre levant. 61.

[387] No doubt OLMT project, being a mass transit project, offers fast mobility facility to the people of Lahore and is planned to cater to about 245,000 passengers everyday and as claimed, the facility shall be an efficient, affordable and environ ment friendly transport service, and shall help in reducing traffic congestion and Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 100 the travelling time between places.

[388] The vehicles to be employed being electric trains will certainly cause reduction of hazardous transport related emissions, but if we reca ll heritage also has its immense significance, and offers lot of public goods and yields public benefits and also help in poverty alleviation. Its positive influence on liveability and economic growth and human development is now well recognized.

[389] Heritage holds into its field some finer graces of civilization . It anchors people to their root, builds self esteem and restores dignity and provides an impetus for local economic development and prosperity. 62. However, it is crucial to understand that the pres ent is not a case of competing interest, and the concern all around should be to achieve sustainable progress and development, and more so when the same could have been, and can still be successfully achieved with some effort, prudence and diligence.

[390] Why s hould we allow irreversible damage to our priceless assets that we have in the shape of centuries old heritage, like the elegant and splendid master piece from the times of brilliant Mughal civilization, the Shalamar Gardens, which , has been recognized as an “asset of outstanding universal value ”, having “ significance ”, which “is so exceptional as to transcend national boundaries and to be of common importance for present and future generations of all humanity ”, deserving permanent protection as a “heritage of highest importance to the international community as a whole ”, and has thus been inscribed on the world heritage list , and like the monumental gateway known as “Chauburji ” because of its four towers , which expand from the top , not present any where in the sub-continent , which is a beloved urban landmark , and a highly visible icon of Lahore.

[391] Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 101 63. It is no body’s case that the OLMT project be scrapped. All that is required, is to ensure that no harm to the monuments is caused by the impact of the project which is, not only our obligation under the mandate of the aforesaid two statutes, but, as shall be discussed later, also is our commitment to the international community.

[392] It hardly needs any emphasis that the purpose, object, intent, and spirit of the sa id two laws i.e. the 1975 Act and the 1985 Ordinance, are the preservation and protection of the “antiquities” moveable or immovable both, and the “special premises” respectively. Both the laws contain elaborate arrangement and provisions for carrying out the aforesaid intent and purpose, including that of declaration and listing of particular properties as antiquities, for enforcing their protection, and of making arrangements for custody, preservation and protection of the antiquities, for examining and a cquisition of any land containing antiquities, for purchasing or taking on lease of the antiquities, for exercising right of pre -emption in respect of any antiquity, for declaring any antiquity to be a protected antiquity, for enforcing compulsory acquisit ion of any antiquity, for prohibition of destruction/damage of the protected antiquity, for prescribing and enforcing measures for protection and preservation of antiquity.

[393] And by way of prescribing a 200 ft protective zone under section 22 of the 1975 Act and section 11 of the 1985 Ordinance which require that no development plan or scheme or new construction shall be undertaken or executed within the distance of two hundred feet (200 ft.) of a protected moveable “antiquity” and “special premises” without the approval, in case of the former, of the Director General, and in relation to the later, of the Government of the Punjab.

[394] It may be relevant to mention here that the above two Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 102 provisions are inconsonance with Article 103 of the “Operational Guidelines f or implementation of World Heritage Convention”, issued by UNESCO, (of which convention Pakistan is a signatory), which Article prescribes adequate buffer zone surrounding the monuments, to give an added layer of protection to the monuments, including its immediate setting, important view, and its other important attributes.

[395] The answer as to why our laws, have prescribed a limit of 200ft. for the preventive/ protective/buffer zone, seems to lie in the scientific fact, as recorded and illustrated by “CALTRON ” (annexure “D” to CMA ), that it is at this distance of 61m (200 ft) that the extenuation of PPV (Peak Particle Velocity)/vibration is reduced to an almost imperceptible level. 64.

[396] In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of the firm view tha t in order to convert the statutory “No” as contained in the above two provisions, into a “Yes”, the authorities concerned ought to have undertaken a scrutiny of the highest order, and the proposal ought to have undergone minute and thorough screening and due diligence, after collecting, and on the basis of, accurate relevant scientific data.

[397] In deciding the request for permissions/NOCs for construction OLMT project within the protective/buffer zone, the statutory intent of preserving and protecting the mon uments, their views, attributes and character, should have been of the foremost and overwhelming importance, and the authorities ought to have satisfied themselves that the option of avoiding intrusion into the protective zone have been fully explored by t he proponent, and the intervention was truly found to be really inevitable, and in the event of proven inevitability of the proposed intrusion, ought have satisfied themselves, on the basis of precise and accurate calculations, assessment, and evaluations of Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 103 the vibration induced by the Metro train proposed to be employed, and the machinery specified for construction purposes shall propagate safe level of vibration.

[398] Similarly, the measurements and calculations of distances between the various points at whi ch the vibration was/is to generate and transmitted and upto the point where they were to hit the monuments, as detailed hereinbefore, ought to have been carried out with care and precision, and preferably the soil layers contiguous to the monuments should also have been tested and analyzed.

[399] The evaluation and analysis of the transit induced vibration also ought to have been based on detailed information of the relevant specification and configuration, but all of the above is lacking in the present case. 65. As noted above, many of the monuments are not just unique and magnificent and reflective of our glorious past carrying immense cultural, social and historical significance, and aes thetic charm and artistic beauty .

[400] The monuments being many hundred years old, admittedly bears signs of abuse and neglect, and suffers from vagaries of weather. Some of these have already developed cracks, however, unfortunately neither the endurance level of these monuments been evaluated/ determined nor is the susceptibility of their foundations and footings been measured.

[401] These foundations and footings have also not been taken into account while calculating the distance between the track and the monuments. The heritage impact assessment as discussed and analyzed above, clearl y indicates and specifies various adverse impact the project will have on the monuments. 66. The statutory intent of protecting and preserving heritage and avoiding any harm thereto is so strong and overwhelming that potential harm to the heritage cannot be taken Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 104 lightly even where the harm is outweighed by the advantages of the proposed development.

[402] The authorities must give highest priority to the objective of law by preserving or enhancing the character and appearance of the heritage, and in case the proposed development militates against the statutory objective, the proposal will prevail only in exceptional cases. 67. It is an admitted position that originally the track of OLMT in front of Lakshmi building and Chauburji as planned by MV Asia, was to b e laid underground however in order to cut down the cost of the project, the length of the underground section of the project was reduced and thus in front of these two monuments also the track is now being built on elevated viaduct instead, although in re spect of Chauburji the option of diverting the alignment to a safe distance is admittedly available. 68.

[403] It may be relevant to mention here that in terms of Article 4 of “the Convention for protection, conservation, presentation and transmission to the fu ture generations of the cultural and natural heritage” adopted by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), to which convention Pakistan is a signatory, we are obliged to ensure the “identific ation, protection, conservation, presentation and transmission to future generations of the cultural and natural heritage”, and to do all that we can towards the said end to the utmost of our own resources and where appropriate with any international assis tance and cooperation, in particular, financial, artistic, scientific and technical which we may be able to obtain.

[404] Pakistan being a signatory to the above convention, and a respectable and worthy member of the comity of nations, is obliged to comply there with, and to fulfil its obligation Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 105 thereunder, more so for the reason that this country has also benefited from the technical assistance and financial help provided by UNESCO, in respect of Shalimar Garden and the Lahore Fort inscribed on the world heritag e list in 1981, and has as per a UNESCO report, received through them a financial assistance of US $ 121,000, out of which US $ 44,000, was for Lahore Fort and the balance was for the Shalamar Gardens. 69.

[405] During its 40th Session held in July 2016 the Wo rld Heritage Committee of UNESCO adopted a resolution expressing its serious concern about the construction of the OLMT project and requested the State Party (the Government of Punjab) to prepare a visual impact study of the Project to be presented to the World Heritage Centre and the Advisory Bodies before pursuing the works of the OLMT associated with the Shalamar Gardens, and also requested them to submit to the World Heritage Centre, in conformity with paragraph 172 of the Operational Guidelines, Techni cal details, including Heritage Impact Assessment (HIA), for all the proposed projects that may have an impact on the outstanding universal value (OUV) of the property (Shalamar Gardens) prior to their approval, for review by the advisory bodies.

[406] The Commi ttee also requested the State Party to invite ICOMOS Reactive Monitoring Mission to the property at its earliest convenience to examine the OLMT and to discuss the same with the relevant Government authorities and to review the management and protection ar rangements of the property. A further request was made to submit to the World Heritage Centre by 1st February 2017 an up -to-dated report on the state of conservation of the property and the implementation of the various recommendations/proposals made by th e Committee as mentioned in the resolution for Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 106 examination of the World Heritage Committee at its 41st Session in 2017 with a view to consider whether there is a certain or potential danger to the outstanding universal value of the property. 70.

[407] The late st report of the UNESCO World Heritage Centre indicates that the conservation issues regarding Shalamar Gardens was presented to the Heritage Committee this year, and that despite efforts made by the World Heritage Centre and ICOMOS, the Government of Punj ab has not invited Reactive Monitoring Mission as requested by the Committee at its last session (decision 40 COM 7B.43), instead the Government, on 29th March, 2017, informed the World Heritage Centre that the Mission will be invited only after the decisi on of the present case. 71 The report also notes that no visual impact study or detailed report on the progress made regarding the enlargement of the buffer -zone, has been submitted to the World Heritage Centre, and that the report submitted by the Gover nment discloses very little information about OLMT Project.

[408] It is further noted that the full potential impact of the project on the OUV of the Shalamar Gardens goes beyond the potential impact of vibration. If is further stated that the visual impact asse ssment has not been completed, and that since no comprehensive heritage impact assessment (HIA) in line with ICOMOS Guidelines has been carried out to address, not only the issue of vibration, but also the visual and noise impacts, the full impact of OLMT Project is yet to be formally defined and that HIA submitted by the Government in 2016 was not in line with the internationally recommended standards and has thus failed to address the full range of impact of the Project .

[409] The report also claims that the construction that has continued on both sides of the Shalamar Gardens is already impacting on the setting and integrity Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 107 of the Gardens and if the Project is allowed to be completed along the Gardens it will irreversibly compromise the authenticity and integr ity of the property, thereby potentially threatening its OUV .

[410] The Committee through its decision adopted in its 41st Session noted that the Reactive Monitoring mission will be invited immediately after the decision of this Court is announced and requested to urgently complete and share with the World Heritage Centre the Visual Impact Study as decided by the World Heritage Committee at its 40th session as soon as possible, and at the latest on 1st December 2017; and to invite a joint World Heritage Centre/ ICOMOS Reactive Monitoring Mission to the property immediately after the announcement of the decision of this Court, to examine the Orange Line Metro Train Project and to discuss the same with the relevant Government authorities and to review the managemen t and protection arrangements of the property and that highest priority must be given to considering how the Shalamar Gardens and their spiritual associations can be sustained alongside any necessary measures to satisfy the needs of a growing city, by setting out the precise and detailed nature of the potential impacts of the Orange Line Metro project on the OUV of the property, and whether and how mitigation measures can be undertaken. 72.

[411] It is now well established that right to life as envisaged by Arti cle 9 of the Constitution includes all those aspects of life which go to make a man’s life meaningful, complete and worth living. In the case of Employees of Pakistan Law Commission vs. Ministry of Works (1994 SCMR 1548), it has been laid down that Article 9 of the Constitution which guarantees life and liberty according to law, is not to be construed in a restrictive manner.

[412] Life has larger concept which include the right of enjoyment of life, Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 108 maintaining adequate level of living for full enjoyment of free dom and rights. 73. In the case of Siddharam Satingappa Mhetre vs. State of Maharastra and others (2011 SCC 694), Indian Supreme Court held that the protection against arbitrary privation of ‘life’ no longer means mere protection from death, or physical injury, but also an invasion of the right to ‘live’ with human dignity, and would include all those aspects of life which would go to make a man’s life meaningful and worth living, such as his tradition, culture and heritage . 74.

[413] In the case of P. Rathin am/Nagbhusan Patnaik vs. Union of India and another (AIR 1994 Supreme Court 1844), It was held that word ‘life’ in Article 21 means right to live with human dignity and the same not merely connote continued drudgery. It takes within its fold, ‘some of the finer graces of human civilization, which makes life worth living’ and that the expanded concept of life would mean the ‘tradition, culture and heritage’ of the concerned person. 75.

[414] In the case of Ramsharan Autyanuprasi & Anr v. Union of India (1988 SCR Supl. (3) 870; AIR 1989 Supreme Court 549) , it was held that it is true that life in its expanded horizons today includes all that give meaning to a man’s life including his tradition, culture and heritage and protection of that heritage in its full measu re would certainly come within the encompass of an expanded concept of Article 21 of the Constitution. 76.

[415] In the present case the relevant authorities have clearly failed to take into account the various crucial relevant aspects of the case, and have fai led in their duty to enforce the mandate of Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 109 law as discussed above, and have ignored the heritage interest secured by law. 77.

[416] In the circumstances, we would dispose of the present appeals by directing the DG Archaeology, Government of Punjab to ensure th at the heritage impact assessment in the matter be carried out afresh keeping in view the above discussion, preferably with the assistance of UNESCO, who seems ready and willing, rather keen to provide such assistance, if need be felt, some organization/bo dy having expertise, experience and credibility like “English Heritage” be also associated with the exercise.

[417] The exercise be commenced at the earliest and preferably within 15 days from today, and fullest endeavour be made that the same be concluded exped itiously and preferably within one month from its commencement, and within 15 days thereafter the DG Archaeology and the Government of Punjab shall decide the request for the NOCs in the light of the report/findings of the fresh heritage impact assessment, with an endeavour to find practicable and viable solutions of the problems and issues that may be pointed out in the said assessment so that the project may be completed as early as possible.

[418] JUDGE JUDGE JUDGE JUDGE JUDGE Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 110 Announced in open Court on _______________ Judge. ‘APPROVED FOR REPORTING’ Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 111 ORDER OF THE COURT With majority of 4 against 1, Maqbool Baqar, J, dissenting, we endorse and approve the NOCs/permission letters issued by the competent authorities and the recomm endations of experts relating to execution, mitigation and remedial measures required to be adopted by the executing agency and allow the Project to proceed subject to the following conditions and directions: - i) The appellant shall make all necessary arrange ments to ensure that the monuments remain stable and undamaged in all respects during the execution of the Project as specified in the HIA and Study of Control of Vibration, Noise and Foundation; ii) Vibration monitoring shall be undertaken as a part of the monitoring plan using the crack measure devices such as Avongard Standard Tell -Tale throughout the construction period and for an additional period of 10 weeks from the date of commencement of commercial operation of the train or such further time as may be directed by the Director General, Archaeology.

[419] In case, it is found that vibration levels at any stage of the construction or operation are exceeding safe limits, construction work / operation shall immediately be discontinued and remedial action shall be taken to ensure that such levels are brought down to acceptable limits. Such actions may inter alia include use of one piece of equipment at a time, during the construction phase, adjustment of train speed, addition of buffers and such other remedial and mitigating measures as may be recommended by the experts; iii) Technical experts shall be present at the sites during the construction phase in the vicinity of the antiquities and special premises with all necessary equipment for monitoring vibration levels.

[420] I n case, vibration levels exceed the acceptable limits, work shall immediately be stopped, remedial measures taken to the satisfaction of experts and further work shall not commence unless written clearance for resumption of work is given by the experts; iv) An independent and experienced Conservation Engineer shall be appointed to monitor the Project, both during the construction and operation phases.

[421] He shall submit monthly reports to the Advisory Committee which shall Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 112 make such further recommendations to the Director General, Archaeology as may be required to ensure that the Project as a whole is meeting all technical requirements meant to preserve, protect and conserve the antiquities or protected premises; v) On completion of the project, the train shall be o perated on experimental basis for at least 2 weeks on the entire length of the route and the vibration levels shall be monitored to ensure that the same are within the acceptable limits.

[422] Commercial operation shall not commence unless written clearance is g iven by the experts conf irming that vibration levels have consistently been found to be within acceptable limits; vi) The speed of the Train shall be reduced while passing near the monuments as recommended by the Directorate General of Archaeology from time t o time on the basis of data made available to it; vii) State of the art vibration measuring equipments shall permanently be installed at suitable places in and around the antiquities and special premises to monitor levels of vibration created by operation of t he train.

[423] Records of the same shall be maintained and regularly checked by a responsible officer deputed to do so; viii) Special teams consisting of qualified experts will be set up which will periodically inspect all antiquities and special premises to detect any damage or deterioration at the sites. Proper records and logbooks shall be maintained for this purpose; ix) Any damage or deterioration shall be reported to the Director General, Archaeology in writing who shall take remedial steps necessary to ensure saf ety of the buildings and structures; x) Recommendations of the Advisory Committee (already set up) shall be placed before the Directorate General of Archaeology, who shall take necessary steps to ensure that the same are complied with in letter and spirit by all concerned agencies, contractors, sub -contractors and operators; xi) Where excavation is necessary it shall be carried out in a way that it would not affect any structure or foundation of Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 113 the antiquities or special premises.

[424] Where necessary special arrang ements shall be made to stabilize and strengthen the structure of the antiquities and special premises. All necessary safety arrangements shall be made in accordance with the best engineering expertise during excavation, construction and execution phases o f the Project; xii) The executing agency shall install accelerometers, velocity transducers, noise detectors and vibration measuring equipment near the antiquities and special premises.

[425] The appellant shall ensure implementation of additional mitigation and rem edial measures as mentioned in vibration analysis report by NESPAK, Heritage Impact Assessment (HIA) as well as in the reports submitted by Dr. Uppal and Dr. Rogers; xiii) Excavation would be carried out in a way that would not affect any of the exposed or buri ed structure of the Special Premises; xiv) In case of any adverse impact to the antiquities or special premises during excavation, construction or execution, the appellant and all other related agencies shall immediately and forthwith stop and discontinue furt her work, take all possible actions to protect and conserve the antiquities and special premises and in this regard, involve such experts and consultants as may be necessary to ensure that the causes and effects of the adverse impact are effectively remove d; xv) A dedicated hotline shall be set up, telephone numbers whereof shall be prominently displayed in public areas around all antiquities and special premises for reporting damage or deterioration observed by members of the public or tourists; xvi) In case, any information/report is received by the Director General, Archaeology the same shall be investigated within 7 days and after receiving recommendations (if any) from experts repair/ renovation work shall be commenced within 30 days; xvii) No building material or equipment shall be stored/stockpiled within protected area of the monuments; Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 114 xviii) No change shall be made in the alignment of the track which brings any part of it nearer to the monuments than the distances set out hereinabove; xix) Dust pollution during constructi on shall be controlled through extensive sprinkling of water on regular basis and taking such other steps including but not limited to covering the monuments with protective sheets in order to avoid any damage from dust; xx) The design of the viaduct and near by stations in terms of colour and designing shall be in harmony with the setting and appearance of the monuments; xxi) The Hydraulic Tank of Shalamar Garden shall be restored, as far as possible, to its original position and the surrounding area will be conve rted into a green area; xxii) Structures on the southern side of the Shalamar Garden shall be camouflaged through construction of a wall in consultation with the Directorate General of Archaeology.

[426] All practicable efforts shall be made to create a buffer Zone around Shalamar Garden as per proposal already pending in the Directorate General of Archaeology and other competent forums; xxiii) The decorative motifs of Shalamar Garden would be replicated on the train station near the Shalamar Garden to create harmony with t he Garden; xxiv) The tile mosaic motifs of the Gulabi Bagh Gateway would be replicated on the nearby station of the Gateway to create harmony with the historic Gateway; xxv) The area around the Chauburji Gateway would be properly attended and developed into a green belt; xxvi) The decorative motifs of the Chauburji Gateway would be replicated on the nearby station of the Chauburji Gateway to create a harmony with the historic Gateway; xxvii) The area around the Zaib -un-Nisa’s Tomb would be properly attended and developed; xxviii) The decorative motifs of the Zaib -un-Nisa’s Tomb would be replicated on the nearby station of the Zaib -un-Nisa’s Tomb to create harmony with the historic; Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 115 xxix) The Respondents shall in consultation with UNESCO and other international agencies prepare phase -wise pl an to control and monitor urban encroachments and the process of creating buffer zone around the Shalamar garden; xxx) All future projects which directly, indirectly and incidentally involve antiquities or heritage sites shall in the first instance be widely p ublicized through print and electronic media at least 6 months prior to proposed date of commencement of the project and public hearings shall be conducted to hear objections, if any against such project; and xxxi) For all future projects, NOCs, licences, appro vals and permissions as required by law shall be obtained before work on the project site is commenced. 2.

[427] In addition to the above, we direct the Government of Punjab within a period of 30 days from the date of this judgment to take the following steps: - e) Set up an Antiquity and Special Premises Fund with the sum of Rupees One Hundred Million which shall be dedicated to monitoring, renovation and reconstruction work of 11 protected and special premises mentioned hereinabove.

[428] It shall be a revolving fund a nd shall be replenished on yearly basis. It shall be utilized firstly for the maintenance, preservation, restoration and renovation work of the protected and Special Premises, subject matter of this lis and thereafter on other Antiquities and Special Premi ses situated in Lahore as may be recommended by the special Committee of Experts constituted under this Judgment; f) A broad based Special Committee of Experts consisting of Director General, Archeology Department; a Professor of the Department of Archeology , University of the Punjab; Head of Department of Structural Engineering, University of Engineering and Technology, Lahore; a Senior Professor nominated by the Chairman of Board of Directors of National College of Arts; chaired by a retired Judge of this C ourt nominated by the Chief Justice of Pakistan shall be notified which shall oversee implementation of the judgment of this Court and the directions issued herein.

[429] This Committee shall also make such further recommendations to the Chief Minister Punjab to undertake such measures as may be necessary to Lahore Orange Line Metro Train Project 116 implement and enforce the directions and recommendations made in this judgment. The tenure of the Committee shall be one year from the date of its notification; g) The Government of Punjab shall retain the serv ices of at least three Experts having expertise in the field of archeology and renovation, preservation and maintenance of antiquities and special premises.

[430] One of the experts shall be a person having expertise in structural engineering. All three experts will work as a Technical Committee with tenure of one year. The Technical Committee shall report to advise and assist the aforesaid Special Committee of Experts. The Committee shall, if required and with the approval of Director General, Archeology retain services of such other experts as it may consider necessary to undertake its work more effectively regarding the steps required to be taken to monitor the protected and Special Premises all over Lahore and suggest remedial measures that may be necessary to ensure the safety of all protected and special premises in Lahore; and h) We also emphasize the fact that the present condition of the protected and special premises calls for major preservation, renovation, reconstruction and repair work.

[431] The Government of Punjab shall take immediate steps and we have been assured by learned Advocate General, Punjab that such steps shall immediately be taken to start repair and renovation work for which the requisite funds will be made available within thirty days from the date of this judgment. 3. In view of the foregoing discussion, the Impugned Judgment of the Lahore High Court is set aside and the instant appeals are allowed in terms noted above.

[432] Civil Petition No.3101 -L of 2016 is unanimously dismissed and Leave to Ap peal is refused. Judge Judge Judge Judge Judge APPROVED FOR REPORTING Announced in Open Court On 08.12.2017. Judge