Case No: C.M.Appeal.87/2022
Case Title: Qausain Faisal (Advocate Supreme Court of Pakistan, Islamabad v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Interior Pakistan Islamabad and others
Subject: Miscellaneous
Judge: Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah
Judgment Date: 18-07-2022
Upload Date: 20-07-2022
Citations: PLD 2022 SC 675
SC Citations: 2022 SCP 231
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.m.a._87_2122.pdf

[1] order dated 06.07.2022 of the Registrar, declining to register the Constitution Petition of the Appellant) Qausain Faisal … Appellant Versus Federation of Pakistan through Secretary M/o Interior, etc . … Respondent s For the Appellant: Mr. Hassan Raza Pasha, ASC. For the Respondents: Nemo. Date of hearing: 18.07.2022 ORDER Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. - Through this appeal under Order V, Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules, 1980 (“Rules”) , the appellant has challenged the order of the Registrar of this Court, dated 06.7.2022 , whereby the constitution petition filed by the appellant under Article 184(3) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (“Constitution”) has not been entertained and registered by the Registrar on the following grounds: a.

[2] That the petitioner is invoking the extra ordinary jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution for the redressal of an individual grievance, which is not permissible in terms of judgment reported as 1998 SCMR 793 titled as “Zulfiqar Mehdi Vs. PIA, etc.” b. That notice issued to the respondent is not properly drawn as it is neither mentioned therein that for what purpose this Constitution Petition is being filed before this Court nor copy of petition has been provided to the respondent. c.

[3] That the petitioner has not point ed out as to what questions of public importance in the instant case are involved with reference to enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights guaranteed under the Constitution, so as to directly invoke jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 184 (3) of the Constitution. d.

[4] That the petitioner has not approached any other appropriate forum available under the law for the same relief and has also not provided any justification for not doing so. C.M.Appeal No.  2 e. That ingredients for invoking extra ordinary jurisdictio n of this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution have not been satisfied. f.

[5] That the certificate provided at page 32 of this Constitution Petition does not fulfill the requirements of Rule 6 of Order XXV of the Supreme Court Rules, 1980. Moreover, t he same contains over writing/cuttings. 2. I have heard the learned counsel for the appellant and have carefully examined the impugned order and the Ru les.

[6] Under the Rules, the Registrar is to perform certain functions that are mostly administrative and mi nisterial in nature . In performing the administrative function of “registration of petitions, appeals, suits and other matters” under Rule 1(6) of Order V of the Rules , the Registrar has been conferred : (i) the power under Rule 10(a) of Order III “to require any plaint, petition of appeal, petition for leave to appeal or other matters” presented to the Court, to be amended in accordance with the practice and procedure of the Court , and (ii) the power under Rule 7 of Order VII to “decline to receive any document” which is presented otherwise than in accordance with the Rules.

[7] It is in exercise of these powers that the Registrar has made the impugned order. The p owers of the Registrar under Rule 10 of Order III alongwith Rule 7 of Order VII of the Rules a re purely administrative in character, which allow him to enforce the practice and procedure of the Court in relation to presentation of cases and ensure that the form of the pleadings and the documents filed therewith is as per the Rules.

[8] The justiciabili ty of the legal and factual questions raised in the petition s is a matter for the C ourt to deal with and decide upon . Registrar enjoying administrative powers under the Rules cannot assume the core adjudicatory role of the C ourt under the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 .

[9] There is no provision in the Rules that empowers the Registrar to touch upon the maintainability of a petition, other than ensuring its proper form and presentation as per the practice and procedure of the Court provided in the Rules . The maintainability and the merits of a petition are justiciable issues , and fall within the domain of the Court.1 3.

[10] Certain miscellaneous matters , that are also essentially procedural in character, regarding which the Registrar ca n exercise the power s of the Court are listed in Rule 1 of Order V of the Rules , but the matters listed there (sub -rules 1 to 31) do not authorize the Registrar to decide upon the maintainability of a constitution petition filed under Article 184(3) of the Constitution .

[11] Therefore, grounds /objections (a), (c), (d) and (e) of the impugned order of the Registrar, which touch upon the questions of maintainability and merits of the case, can 1 Farman Ali v. Muhammad Ishaq PLD 2013 SC 392 ; P. Surendran vs State 2019 SCC Online SC 507 . C.M.Appeal No.  3 only be examined by the Court throug h a judicial determination and not by the Registrar or a Judge hearing an appeal -in-chambers , like the present on e against the order of the Registrar , on the administrative side.

[12] Such an exercise of power by the Registrar falls outside his domain under the Rules. Grounds (a) , (c), (d) and (e) of the impugned Order of the Registrar are, therefore, overruled. They may be determined by the Court on the judicial side . As far as grounds (b) and (f) are concerned, they fall within the administrative powers exerci sed by the Registrar and are found justified, therefore sustained.

[13] T he appellant shall meet these objections, to the satisfaction of the Registrar, within two weeks. Once the needful is done, the office shall register the constitution petition of the appel lant and fix it before an appropriate Bench on the judicial side. The appeal is partly allowed in the se terms.