Case No: C.M.A.597/2024
Case Title: The Province of Balochistan through the Chief Secretary Services & General Administration Department Quetta v. Karamat Ali and others
Subject: Miscellaneous/Others
Judge: (1) Mr. Justice Amin-Ud-Din Khan (2) Mr. Justice Shahid Waheed
Judgment Date: 11-07-2024
Upload Date: 24-08-2024
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2024 SCP 288
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.m.a._597_2024.pdf

[1] ORDER Amin-ud-Pin Khan, J. The prayer made in the CMA No. 598 of 2023 Learned counsel for the applicants states that his applications be 2. decided first and thereafter the appeals may be heard. Despite the fact thatMr. Mansoor Usman Awan, Attorney General for PakistanMr. Faisal Siddiqui, ASC (in both CMAs)IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN (Appellate Jurisdiction) Larger Bench Mr.

[2] Justice Amin-ud-Din Khan Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar Mr. Justice Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi Mr. Justice Shahid Waheed Mr. Justice Irfan Saadat Khan Mr. Justice Shahid Bilal Hassan is reproduced as follows: “in the view of the above, it is most respectfully and most humbly prayed that this Honourable Cowl: may graciously be pleased to kindly restraint the Appellant (Federation of Pakistan through the Ministry of Interior) from engaging any private counsel from pleading and conducting this present Appeal on their behalf and furthermore, only allow the Office of the Attorney General to plead and conduct this present Appeal. ”CMAs No. 597 & 598 of 2024 in ICAs 16 gs  (For rejection of the appeals on behalf of the respondents 1 to 5) The Province of Balochistan through the Chief Secretary Services & Department Quetta t 2CMAs iVo. 597 of 24 etc hearing. well as follows: the basis of the judgment 4.from the next week summer vacations are scheduled and this bench may not be available, learned counsel has consumed most of the time of today ’s with regard to engagement of private counsel and there were compelling circumstances, the prayer of the learned counsel for the applicants is absolutely misconceived and the applications deserve to be dismissed.•> Learned AGP further argued that even on cited by the learned counsel there was no closure of door for engaging a private counsel and there was a way even in the said judgment for engaging a private counsel.

[3] He states that when the Rules have also been amended after the promulgation of the judgment cited by him and rule 14(1A) has been added thereto. He states that the procedure has been complied withas well as 3. We have heard the learned counsel for the applicants learned Attorney General for Pakistan (“AGP ”) at length.

[4] Learned counsel for the applicants has argued the case in the light of judgment of this Court reported as Rcishecd Ahmcid v. Federation of Pakistcm thr. Secretary^ Ministry of Information, Broadcastino and National Heritage, Government of (PLD 2017 SC 121) and argued that the private counsel simultaneously the Provincial Government also cannot engage a private counsel as in the matter in hand a private counsel has been engaged and appeals have been filed through them.

[5] In response to the objection of the learned counsel for the applicants, learned AGP states that Rules of Business, 1973 (“Rules ”) with regard to the Federation have been amended and after the cited judgment, rule 14(1A) thereof was introduced which isPakistan Islamabad, etc. Federation as as ministries cannot engage a “(lA) A Division may, for compelling reasons for a particular case, engage a private counsel and for that purpose shall refer the case to Law and Justice Division which may, after consultation with the Attorney General, allow engagement of such counsel on payment of fee by the Division concerned. " 3CMAsNo. 597 of 24 etc 5. gone• .V “No Advocate other than an Advocate-on-Record shall appear or plead in any matter unless he is instructed by an Advocate- on-Record. ”6.

[6] We observe that for filing a petition or an appeal before this Court the procedure for filing of an appeal is provided under Supreme Court Rules, 1980 and that is primarily filed through AOR. In these appeals the AOR has been appointed by the concerned Division in accordance with the Rules, therefore, there is no defect in filing the same.

[7] Order IV Rule 6 of the Supreme Court Rules, 1980 is relevant, which is reproduced:We have gone through the Rules of Business, 1973 and the judgment reported as Rasheed Ahmad v. Federation of Pakistan thr. Secretary^ Ministru of Information, Broadcasting and National Heritage, Government of Pakistan Islamabad, etc . (PhD 2017 SC 121) cited by the learned counsel for the applicants.

[8] We agree with the learned AGP that even in the judgment referred supra there was no closure of door for engaging a private counsel, there was a way mentioned in the said judgment for engaging a private counsel, after insertion of rule 14(1A) in the Rules, the power to engage a private counsel by a Division has been enhanced, though the Division is bound to follow the procedure provided under Rule lA cited above.

[9] The learned AGP has apprised us with record whereby the procedure has been adopted and complied with and the learned AGP has also stated that there is no defect in engaging a private counsel and further we have through the record cited by the learned AG and found that the procedure provided in the Rules has been complied with.

[10] The other judgment of this Court in CP No. 1026 of 2021 has been cited by the learned counsel for the applicants for engaging private counsel. We have observed that the facts and circumstances mentioned in the said judgment are different and the same is not applicable to the facts of these matters. J CMAsNo. 597 of 24 etc 7. instruct the counsel to appear. applications.

[11] The applications thus, stand dismissed. Islamabad 11 th July 2024 RizwanThe appeals have been filed correctly through AOR and AOR can There is no reason to allow these CMA Nos.597 & 598 of2024 Shahid Waheed, J-. I have read the order put forth by my learned fellow judge, Amin-ud-Din Khan, J., regarding the two applications mentioned in the caption.

[12] I concur with the order. provided in the order. These two applications (i.e., CMA No.597 of2024 in ICA 2. No. 16 of 2023 and CMA No. 598 of 2024 in ICA No.24 of 2023) are intended to restrain the Government from engaging private counsel to plead and conduct its cases. It is important to briefly outline the background that explains the necessity of filing these applications.

[13] Several petitions were filed in this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, challenging the lawfulness of sections 2(l)(d)(i)&(ii) and section 59(4) of the Pakistan Army Act, 1952. The Federation petitions through various Ministries such as Defence, Interior, Law & Justice, etc. The Province of Baluchistan was also a respondent in some petitions.

[14] After these petitions were allowed, intra-court appeals were filed under section 5 of the Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023. Instead of filing a single appeal on behalf of the Federation of Pakistan, each Ministiy was instructed to engage private counsel to pursue their respective appeals.

[15] The Province of Baluchistan also engaged private counsel to pursue its appeal. This approach raised concerns about the possible misuse of public funds and unnecessary delays in the disposal of appeals affecting the lives and liberties of citizens, especially when, in one appeal, the Attorney General under Article 100 of the Constitution is seeking the right to present arguments to the Court.

[16] As I understood from the arguments canvassed at the Bar, the bedrockHowever, I will include a note to explain further the reasons of Pakistan was arrayed as one of the respondents in these CMA Nos.597 & 598 of2024 of these concerns is Rasheed Ahmad ’s case\ which led to the objections made by the applicants. 3.

[17] Government ’s approach of allowing Ministries to file separate appeals was imprudent. One consolidated appeal was sufficient. Since we are not concerned here with the maintainability of multiple appeals, we will focus on the question that comes up for pleading on behalf of the Government, given the circumstances.

[18] This question makes it necessary to review the scheme of law governing the legal practice of Advocates before this Court. It must be remembered that the license to practice law confers twofold The “right to act” refers to taking steps to lay the case before the Court, for instance, making an application or presenting a petition unless he has been appointed by a document in writing signed by such person or his authorised agent or some other person duly authorized by him to make such appointment, and such document has been filed in the Registry2.

[19] A document appointing an Advocate to act on behalf of any person is called Wakalatnama (power of attorney). Rule 15 of Order IV of the Supreme Court Rules, 1980 says that no Advocate other than an Advocate-on-Record is entitled to act for a party in any proceeding in the Supreme Court. For this Advocates-on-Record, and the applicants have not questioned their appointments and their right to act for the Government, so there isour determination: whether private counsel can be restrained from or appeal.

[20] No Advocate can exercise this right for any person * Rasheed Ahmed v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Information, Broadcasting and National Heritage, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad and others [PLD 2017 Supreme Court 121]. 2 Order IV, Rule 22 of the Supreme Court Rules, 1980.rights on an Advocate: the “right to act” and the “right to plead. ” reason, in the cases at hand, the Government has engagedBe it noted in the beginning that the Federal CMA Nos.597 & 598 of2024 no need to dilate further on this aspect.

[21] Given the facts, the filing of appeals on behalf of the Government cannot be held invalid. The “right to plead ”, as it suggests, is a right by which 4. position on behalf of a person or party. Rule 6 of Order IV of the Supreme Court Rules, 1980 enacts that no Advocate other than an Advocate-on-Record shall appear or plead in any matter before this Court unless an Advocate-on-Record instructs him.

[22] In line with this rule. Form No.5 of Sixth Schedule to the Supreme Court Rules, 1980 provides a specimen of the Power of Attorney to Advocate-on-Record, which, among other things, gives power to an Advocate-on-Record “to appoint and instruct counsel ”. So viewed, it is under this power the Advocate-on-Record has appointed and instructed private counsel to argue the matter on behalf of the Government.

[23] Here, the applicants ’ objection needs consideration: when a competent and proficient Attorney General and his team were available to the Government, why were private counsel instructed to plead the Government ’s stance? The applicants sought strength in their argument from Rasheed Ahmad ’s case (supra).

[24] This objection might have been weighty if it had been a case of a particular individual involving a simple question of law. On the contrary, the substantive questions involved in the appeals significantly impact the lives and liberties of citizens. These questions partake of the colour of criminal, constitutional and international human rights.

[25] Standing at the rostrum in the courtroom, the Attorney General stated that although he was conversant with criminal law, he lacked that much expertise which required to address the complex questions of criminal law so raisedan Advocate appears before the Court to present and argue a are out of the ordinary, with broad implications that will 7 CMA Nos.597 & 598 of2024 in appeals, and therefore, being compelled, private counsels have been engaged to render comprehensive and effective assistance to this Court in the public interest.

[26] The Attorney General ’s honesty and sincerity in admitting his limitations are appreciated. His statement shows that he is a thorough professional and leads us to conclude that the engagement of private counsel was not for any improper motive. What ’s more, it is to be noted that the scope of appeal under section 5 of the Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023, is also to be settled, and since all the questions raised in the appeals have never been brought before this Court for consideration, they ought to be discussed extensively to arrive at a sagacious answer.

[27] In my opinion, such a situation constitutes a "compelling reason" within the contemplation of Rule 14(1 “A) of the Rules of Business, 1973, for engaging private counsel. It also meets the test set out in Rasheed Ahmed's case for engaging private counsel, which held that the engagement of a individual or for any other ulterior reason.

[28] It has been brought to engaging private counsel. So, we find that the applicants ’ objection does not hold water. As a result, we conclude that private counsel. given the circumstances, cannot be restrained from pleading the cause of the Government. 5. APPROVED FOR REPORTINGour notice that there has been no departure from the procedure forand in the public interest and not to protect or save a particularprivate counsel could only be sanctioned for compelling reasons These applications fail and are dismissed accordingly.