Case No: C.M.A.290/2012
Case Title: [Constitution Petition under Article 184(3) of the Constitution regarding alleged Memorandum to Admiral Mike Mullen by Mr. Hussain Haqqani, former Ambassador of Pakistan to the United States of America]
Subject: N/A
Judge: Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry
Judgment Date: 30-01-2012
Upload Date: 30-01-2012
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2012 SCP 6
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Const.P.77-2011-Dt-30.01.2012[MemoScandalCase].pdf

[1] order. CMA NO. 331 OF 2012 2. The learned counsel for Mr. Hussain Haqqani has submitted an application, inter alia, stating therein that he has fully cooperated with the Commission and will continue to do so and also undertakes to return to Pakistan any time on four days’ notice to join the proceedings , if and when required to do so by the Commission, therefore, the condition placed upon him of not leaving the country be withdrawn and he be allowed to join his family abroad .

[2] The learned Attorney General for Pakistan has no objection if permission as prayed for is accorded and Mr. Huss ain Haqqani is allowed to leave the country in view of the undertak ing given in the application to return back on four days ’ notice whenever his attendance is required by the Commission. It is to be noted that in the earlier orders dated 01.12.2011 & 30.12 .2011 , he was asked not to leave the country CONST P 77 - , etc. 4 without prior permission of this Court and now such permission is being sought and for the reasons disclosed hereinabove, he is allowed to leave the country.

[3] However, he will provide his full particulars to the Registrar of this Court and be also bound to return back on four days’ notice if his attendance is required by the Commission or by this Court. CMA NO. 329 OF 2012 3. Mr. Muhammad Akram Sheikh, Sr. ASC has submitted an application for recording of evid ence outside the country.

[4] He may place this request before the Commission for passing of appropriate order. 4. Mr. Mansoor Ijaz has addressed a letter to the Chief Justice of Pakistan under the caption “secret letter” wherein he has disclosed certain in formation, but we are not aware of its authenticity. It is a cardinal principle of law that whenever a person claims confidentiality or requests the Court to treat any document as confidential or classified, the Court may go through it, but its status to be treated as confidential or classified document has to be decided according to law.

[5] However, as he has engaged a counsel , we would have appreciated if he had sent such a document to the Court through his counsel . Be that as it may, at this stage, we would not be considering this document for any purpose, but the same would be kept in a sealed cover under lock by the Registrar of this Court.

[6] Registrar present in Court is directed accordingly. CONST. PETITION NO. 92 OF 201 1 5. Mr. Shahid Orakzai, petitio ner has appeared in person and stated that he ha s raised a different question in his petition , which are not taken up in the petitions already entertained. Issue notice to the CONST P 77 - , etc. 5 respondents to file comments before the next date of hearing.

[7] To be fixed along with other petitions. IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ MIAN SHAKIRULLAH JAN , J. TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI , J. JAWWAD S. KHAWAJA, J. ANWAR ZAHEER JAMALI, J. KHILJI ARIF HUSSAIN, J. TARIQ PARVEZ, J. MIAN SAQIB NISAR, J. AMIR HANI MUSLIM, J. Islamabad, the 30th January , 2012