Case No: C.M.A.2769/2023
Case Title: Mohammad Sibtain Khan and others v. Election Commission of Pakistan through Chief Election Commissioner Islamabad and others
Subject: Miscellaneous/Others
Judge: Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial
Judgment Date: 19-04-2023
Upload Date: 19-04-2023
Citations: NA
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 118
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.m.a._2769_2023.pdf

[1] order dated 14.04.2023 (“Order”), for the release of Rs. 21 Billion to the Election Commission of Pakistan (“Commission”) for the holding of general elections t o the Punjab and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Assemblies. 2. CMA  is a report filed by the State Bank of Pakistan stating that a sum of Rs. 21 Billion from Account No.

[2] I of the Federal Consolidated Fund (“Fund”) has been allocated for purposes of the aforemen tioned general elections. The Commission has however filed a report (CMA ) stating that the said funds have not yet been made available to it. These CMAs are taken on record. 3. The Finance Division , Government of Pakistan has also filed a report (C MA ) in terms of the Order.

[3] The report seeks to justify why the funds have not been made available. Briefly stated, it is reported that the matter of providin g the funds was placed before the Federal Cabinet which, at its meeting held on CMAs. 2769 -2773 o f 2023 In CMA No.2600 of 2023 in Const.P.5 of 2023. 3 17.04.202 3, decided that a demand for the authorization and release there of be sent to the National Assembly for its consideration in terms of Article 82(2) read with Article 8 4 of the Constitution.

[4] The following motion was tabled before the National Assembly the s ame day (“Demand No. 64A”) : “That a supplementary grant not exceeding Rs. 21 billion be granted to the Federal Government to meet the expenditure (other than charged) during the financial year ending 30th June, 2023 in respect of Election Commission of Pa kistan (Demand No. 64A)” The Finance Division has reported that this motion was rejected by the National Assembly and the necessary funds could not therefore be made available to the Commission. 4.

[5] The first point to note is that , as set out in the Order, it was specifically queried from the team from the Finance Division and confirmed by them, that Article 84 allows and enables the Federal Government to make expenditur es from the Fund for, inter alia, “expenditure upon some new service not included in the Annual Budget Statement” during any financial year .

[6] For such expenditure the Federal Government obtains ex post facto authorization from the National Assembly in the f orm of a Supplementary Budget Statement. The team from Finance Division also stated that the normal practice was for the Supplementary Budget Statement for the current financial year (as also any previous years) to be laid before the National Assembly alon g with the Annual Budget Statement for the succeeding financial year, with both then to b e approved.

[7] There can therefore be no doubt, as noted in the Order, that the Federal Cabinet all along itself had the authority and power to authorize the expenditure of Rs. 21 Billion from the Fund CMAs. 2769 -2773 o f 2023 In CMA No.2600 of 2023 in Const.P.5 of 2023. 4 in order to enable the Federation to perform its constitu tional obligations in relation to the general elections . 5.

[8] The learned Attorney General, in our view quite correctly and properly, did not attempt to seriously dispute the position as just stated. However, the reason why in the present case the matter was first referred to the National Assembly was sought to be explained. The learned Attorney General submitted that at an earlier date, the National Assembly had passed a resolution expressing its disapproval of the release of any funds for the holding of the general elections.

[9] It was this resolution that created a certain doubt and uncertainty , and so the Federal Cabinet decided to first refer to the National Assembly. On a query from the Court the learned Attorney General stated that the earlier resolution wa s not in terms of a specific request for a grant of funds for a financial measure.

[10] With respect, we were not satisfied that the earlier resolution stood in the way of the Federal Cabinet exercising its constitutional power under Article 84. The reasons for this are set out below. 6. To the extent therefore that the report of the Finance Division concludes, or proceeds on the basis that, the Federal Government did not itse lf have the requisite constitutional authority and power at all times to authorize the ex penditure of Rs. 21 Billion for the general elections, it cannot be accepted . 7.

[11] The effect of the Federal Cabinet ’s decision to refer the matter to the National Assembl y in terms as noted above, and for Demand No. 64A to be rejected when voted upon by that House may now be considered . In terms of the system of parliamentary CMAs. 2769 -2773 o f 2023 In CMA No.2600 of 2023 in Const.P.5 of 2023. 5 democracy envisaged by the Constitution the Government of the day must command the confidence of t he majority of the National Assembly at all times .

[12] Furthermore, given that the office of Prime Minister has primacy (who is declared by Article 91(1) to be the chief executive of the Federation) , this also means that the Prime Minister must enjoy the confi dence of the majority of the National Assembly at all times. It follows from the foregoin g (and this is an important constitutional convention) that the Government of the day must be able to secure the passage of all financial measures that it submits befo re the National Assembly.

[13] This would be certainly true for a financial measure of constit utional importance, i.e., one that seeks the release of funds for the holding of general elections to two Provincial Assemblies. 8. When viewed from this perspective t he rejection of Demand No. 64A has serious constitutional implications.

[14] One possibility is that the Government (and also, since the Federal Cabinet is appointed on the advice of, and is headed by, him, the Prime Minister) have lost the confidence of the maj ority of the members of the National Assembly. The learned Attorney General categorically stated that this was not so.

[15] The Federal Cabinet and the Prime Minister have, and had, at all times the confidence of the majority of the National Assembly. For prese nt purposes, we accept this statement made by the learned Attorney General. The other possibility then is that the putative rejection of Demand No. 64A is to be regarded as anomalous, and the resulting situation can be rapidly rectified.

[16] The learned Attorn ey General fully appreciated the serious constitutional consequences that would flow , wer e the first possibility to reflect the correct position . Furthermore, any CMAs. 2769 -2773 o f 2023 In CMA No.2600 of 2023 in Const.P.5 of 2023. 6 future to and fro of this matter between the executive and legislative branches would not adv ance or serve any constitutional purpose.

[17] T here would be a serious breach of constitution al duty and obligation. It is also to be emphasized that the orders of this Court seek only to enforce and effectuate binding constitutional obligations. A disobedienc e and defiance of the orders of the Court can itself have serious consequences. The learn ed Attorney General was therefore directed to draw the attention of the Federal Cabinet and the Prime Minister to the foregoing so that the matter is remedied at the e arliest.

[18] The Court requires that appropriate remedial measures be taken in full measure n ot later than 27.04.2023 and, in particular, by that date the sum of Rs. 21 Billion be provided, in immediately available and realizable funds, to the Commission for t he holding of the general elections to the Punjab and KPK Assemblies.

[19] CMA  is, for the time being, dealt with in the foregoing terms. 9. CMA  is filed by the Federal Government. It seeks to place on record a report, prepared by the Minist ry of Defence, on the security situation in the country at the present time and for the n ext few months This CMA is moved under Order 33, R. 6 SCR and the relief sought is for the order dated 04.04.2023 , whereby CP  was finally disposed of , be recall ed.

[20] It was pointed out to the learned Attorney General that such an application could not be entertained nor relief granted , as CP  ha s been d ecided by final judgment. CMA  is therefore disposed of as not maintainable. 10. The last matter is CM A  which purports to be a representation filed by the Commission.

[21] It seeks, in e ssence, for CMAs. 2769 -2773 o f 2023 In CMA No.2600 of 2023 in Const.P.5 of 2023. 7 the Court to restore the date fo r the general elections to be 08.10.2023, which was impugned before the Court in CP  and set aside by the order dated 04.04.2023. The Commission seeks restoration of the said date on essentially security gr ounds, which in large measure overlap the concerns expressed in the report of the Ministry of Defence appended to CMA .

[22] In our view the Commission seeks, in t he guise of a representation, to re-agitate matters that were before the Court when CP  was heard and decided, and in which two fully instructed learned counsel were permitted to make submissions on its behalf. It is impermissible to attempt to so re open issues and questions that already stand finally decided.

[23] The representation is not maintainable and CMA  is disposed of accordingly. Sd/- Chief Justice Sd/- Judge Islamabad 19.04.2023 Sd/- Judge