Case No: C.P.L.A.3213-L/2019
Case Title: Muhammad Islam v. The State through Advocate General Punjab, Lahore, etc
Subject: NAB/Bail Before Arrest
Judge: MR. JUSTICE QAZI MUHAMMAD AMIN AHMED
Judgment Date: 14-04-2020
Upload Date: 17-04-2020
Citations: 2020 SCMR 841
SC Citations: 2020 SCP 68
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._3213_l_2019.pdf

[1] order dated 2.10.2019 [assed by the Lahore High Court Multan Bench Multan in W.P. No.) Muhammad Islam …Petitioner (s) Versus The State through Advocate General Punjab, Lahore, etc. …Res pondent (s) For the Petitioner (s): Mr. Asaf Faish -ud-Din Verdeg, ASC along with M. Islam For the Respondent(s) : N.R.

[2] Date of hearing: 14.04.2020. ORDER Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J .- Apprehending arrest, Muhammad Islam, petitioner, seeks admission to bail; he is amongst array of the accused in a NAB reference ; a dismissed constable of Special Branch , he is blamed to have lured, alongside co-accused, members of the public to invest in his Multan based travel agency, styled as “Bin Islam Travels & Tours ” ; lucrative profits, offered by the accused , attracted no less than 61 investors in the business, subsequently turned out as farce ; he attempted to pacify the disappointed clientele by issuing bank cheques, bounced upon presentation .

[3] In the backdrop of petitioner ’s failure before a learned Division Bench of the Lahore High Court at Multan, his learned counsel contends that he was being hounded on trump up charges , manipulated by his adversary Zaheer Babar , a Police Inspector , currently serving as Station House Officer ; that without prejudice to Civil Petition No. 3213 -L of 2019 2 petitioner’ s position, the accusation does not fall within the remit of NAB’s jurisdiction as the group of alleged affectees does not constitute “public at large ”, leaving the issue to be more aptly dealt with in regu lar criminal/civil jurisdiction ; projecting the agency as a non -governmental organization, the learned counsel concluded that the petitioner merely drew commission paid by various airlines and as such cannot be held responsible for betrayal of offered windfall to the investors . 2.

[4] Heard. Record perused. 3. Principles, applicable to grant of an ticipatory bail in a cognizable/non -bailable offence are by now well entrenched ; these do not admit denials or parallel stories to ward off evidence/material prima facie constituting the offence nor the witnesses can be stripped off their credentials at the investigative stage so as to divert the usual course of law; a claimant must point out circumstances , reasonably suggesting abuse of process of law with strappings of mala fide , lurking behind the intended arrest ; statements of 61 persons with diverse and different backgrounds, clamouring foul play cannot be summarily brushed aside to accommodate petitioner ’s plea ; same goes for a detailed and comprehensive investigative process , carried out pursuant to call up notice , followed by an inqui ry, findings whereof, are prima facie pointed upon petitioner ’s culpability for an offence wherein grant of bail is narrowly jacketed .

[5] Petition fails. Leave refused. Judge Judge Islamabad , the 14th April, 2020 Not approved for reporting Azmat /-