Case No: C.P.L.A.715/2020
Case Title: Zafar Iqbal v. Additional District and Sessions Judge, Ferozewala & others
Subject: Suit for specific performance/Agreement to sell
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa
Judgment Date: 17-02-2023
Upload Date: 22-02-2023
Citations: 2023 SCMR 613
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 63
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._715_2020.pdf

[1] judgment dated 19.12.2019 passed by Lahore High Court , Lahore in W.P. Zafar Iqbal …Petitioner Versus Additional District and Sessions Judge, Ferozewala & others …Respondents For the Petitioner : Hafiz Muhammad Yusuf, ASC For Respondent s 2-4: Mr. Aftab Alam Yasir , ASC Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR Date of Hearing: 17.02.2 023 ORDER Qazi Faez Isa, J .

[2] The learned counsel for the petitioner states that a suit was filed on 19 December 2002 by respondents No. 2, 3 and 4 (‘the said respondents ’) seeking specific performance of a purported oral agreement entered into with the seller, namely, Mst. Rehmat Bibi, who was arrayed as a defendant. After filing of the said suit Mst.

[3] Rehmat Bibi passed away and some of her legal heirs were brought on the record . However , he submits th at since Zafar Iqbal , the present petitioner, was not arrayed as a legal heir , despite being the son of Mst. Rehmat Bibi , he submitted an application for his impleadment in the suit as a defendant , which was allowed.

[4] Revision against the order allowing the application was dismissed whereafter the said respondents filed Writ Petition No. before the Lahore High Court, Lahore , but withdr ew it on 1 April 2015. Evidence in the suit was led and concluded . Thereafter, the said respondents filed an applica tion seeking amendment of the plaint, alleging that Zafar Iqbal was not the son of Mst.

[5] Rehmat Bibi , but their application was dismissed by the learned Civil Judge . However , the same was allowed by the revision al Court, whose order was sustained by the High Court in the impugned judgment . The learned counsel states that the said respondents are in possession of the suit property , therefore, they are CP  2 not interested to have their suit decided .

[6] He next contends that , if for the sake of the argument alone , it be accepted that Zafar Iqbal is not the son of Mst. Rehmat Bibi it should be the legal heirs of Mst. Rehmat Bibi who would be aggrieved , and not the said respondents . He further states that the suit will either be decreed or dismissed on its own merits , and who is or is not the legal heir of Mst.

[7] Rehmat Bibi is of no concern to the said respondents. 2. The learned Mr. Aftab Alam Yasir, representing the said respondents , states that he ha d submitted an application in the office of this Court seeking permiss ion that he may also be permitted to argue the case as a co -counsel, but his application was not entertained by the office.

[8] The learned Mr. Aftab Alam Yasir was already engaged as a counsel and was also in attendance on the last date of hearing . The office was correct in maintaining that two counsel cannot simultaneously argue on behalf of the same party , however, since only one counsel is before us , namely, Mr. Aftab Alam Yasir, ASC, we have heard his submissions . 3.

[9] The learned Mr. Aftab Alam Yasir stat es that the interest of the said respondents will be adversely affected if the amendment to the plaint is not allowed because Zafar Iqbal is not the son of Mst. Rehmat Bibi. Therefore, we asked him, what difference would it make to the said respondents ( the plaintiff s in the suit) as to whether Zafar Iqbal is a legal heir of Mst.

[10] Rehmat Bibi or not because their suit will either be decreed or dismissed , but the learned counsel was not able to give any satisfactory answer. On the contrary, the said responden ts’ interest is better protected because in the eventuality the suit w ere to be decreed without Zafar Iqbal being arrayed as a party the n he may file an application , under section 12(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (‘the Code ’), stating that the de cree was obtained by fraud since he was a necessary party being a legal he ir, yet was not arrayed as a defendant, and s eek to set aside such decree. 4.

[11] In any case the matter stood concluded when the said respondents had withdrawn their Writ Petition No.  from the High Court. If they had any grievance with regard to Zafar Iqbal being arrayed as a party they should have agitated it then , and should not have withdrawn the ir petition. We also cannot be mindful of the fact that evidence of both sides has been recorded and concluded .

[12] CP  3 Undoubtedly, the suit will be decided on its own merit s, that is, the learned Trial Court Judge will de termine whether an oral sale agreement had been entered into and whether the suit should be decreed or not . The said res pondents want ed to amend their plaint by challeng ing Zafar Iqbal’s paternity/maternity which has no connection with a suit which seeks specific performance of a purported agreement .

[13] It is also noteworthy that the defendants in the suit are keen to proceed with the suit , filed by the said respondents nineteen years ago, but the said respondents are delay ing its conclusion, giv ing credence to t he learned counsel for the petitioner ’s contention that since the said respondents are in possession of the suit property they do not want the suit to be decided. 5.

[14] In the facts and circumstances of the case , there was no justification for the exercise of revisional powers and to set aside the order of the learned Judge of the Trial Court which had dismiss ed the said respondents’ application for amendment of the plaint and s uch exercise of power , in the facts and circumstances of the case , did not come within the purview of section 115 of the Cod e. 6.

[15] Therefore , for the aforesaid reasons we set aside the order of the Lahore High Court , Lahore, dated 19 December 2019 and of the Court of Additional District Judge, Ferozewala dated 19 October 201 7 by converting this petition into an appeal and allow ing it. We also impos e costs on respondents No. 2, 3 and 4 throughout , to be paid to the petitioner, as in our opinion the said respondents abused the process of the court and indulged in unnecessary litigation.