Case No: C.P.L.A.69-Q/2015
Case Title: Jamal Khan v. The Secy: Home Deptt: Govt. of Balochistan & others
Subject: Writ Petition/Quashment
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed
Judgment Date: 09-09-2020
Upload Date: 12-11-2020
Citations: 2021 SCMR 468
SC Citations: 2020 SCP 255
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._69_q_2015.pdf

[1] judgment dated 04.02.2015 passed by the High Court of Balochistan in C.P. No. ) Jamal Khan …Petitioner(s) Versus Secretary Home Department …Res pondent (s) For the Petitioner(s): Mr. Abdus Saleem Ansari, ASC Mr. Manzoor Ahmed Rehmani, ASC For the Respondent(s) : N.R. Date of hearing: 09.09.2020. ORDER Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Jamal Kha n, petitioner, is in contest over a piece of land with rival claimants ; they relied upon an arbitration agreement , purportedly executed way back on 2.2.2000; according to him , the instrument is fake as he n ever thumb marked any such agreement and, thus, the respondents were liable to be prosecuted for forgery and fraud .

[2] After his failure with the local police, the petitioner approached a Justice of Peace albeit with no better fate ; a learned Division Bench of the High Court of Balochistan declined to issue a direction for registration a criminal case on the ground that prima facie the dispute inter se the parties was of civil nature as both sides were asserting their divergent claims on a common land .

[3] Inordi nate delay and availability of alternate remedies were other considerations that weighed with the High Court. 2. Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that accusation disclose d commission of a cognizable offence and as such a statutory duty was ca st upon the Station House Officer to register a Civil Petition No.69 -Q of 2015 2 formal First Information Report so as to investigate the same and his failure was amenable to in terference. 3.

[4] Heard. 4. Be that as it may, at the center of controversy is a thumb impression on an arbitrat ion agreement being attributed to the petitioner, however, repudiated by him as forge. Report submitted by the police does not support petitioner’s claim and there is consensus that both sides are locked in a dispute of civil nature .

[5] Against the above pecu liar backdrop, refusal by the Justice of Peace to issue direction to the Station House Officer and non -interference by the High Court therewith do not suffer from any jurisdictional error or flaw calling for intervention by this Court. Petition fails. Leav e declined. Judge Judge Islamabad, the 9th September , 2020 Not approved for reporting Azmat /-