Case No: C.P.L.A.205-L/2017
Case Title: Wafaqi Mohtasib Secretariat, Islamabad. v. S.N.G.P.L, Lahore, etc
Subject: OGRA/.
Judge: Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah
Judgment Date: 11-08-2020
Upload Date: 24-08-2020
Citations: PLD 2020 SC 586
SC Citations: 2020 SCP 178
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._205_l_2017.pdf

[1] order of Lahore High Court, Lahore Dated 13.12.2016, passed in W.P. No. 36461 of 2016) Wafaqi Mohtasib Secretariat, Islamabad, etc. ...….Petitioners Versus SNGPL, Lahore, etc. …….Respondent s For the petitioners: Hafiz Ahs aan Ahmad Khokhar, ASC Mr. Imtiaz A. Shaukat, AOR Mr. M. Usman Arif, DAG. For the respondents: Mr.

[2] Um ar Sharif, ASC. Date of hearing: 11.08.2020 ORDER Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. - Brief facts of the case are that Respondent No.2, an industrial gas consumer, approached the Wafaqi Mohtasib (Ombudsman ) to complain about the excessive gas billing by Sui Nort hern Gas Pipeline Ltd . (SNGPL), Respondent No.1 and the “mal-administration ” at the hands of its official s.

[3] In the “F indings Recommendations” issued by Wafaqi Mohtasib ’s Secretariat dated 28.10.2014 the complaint of Respondent No.2 against R espondent No.1 was rejected finding no mal - administration on the part of Respondent No.1. Thereafter, the Respondent No.2 filed a review and in its “Revised F indings ” and “Final Recommendations for Implementation” issued by the Wafaqi Mohtasib’s Secretariat on 26.02.2016 , Respondent No.1 was recommended to reconsider the matt er by adopting proper procedure and take disciplinary action against the delinquent officers, etc.

[4] Respondent No.1 challenged these Recommendations of the Ombudsman before the High Court and vide imp ugned order dated 13.12.2016 the High Court1 held that the disputes pertaining to detection bills on allegations of meter tampering fell within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Oil and Gas Regulatory 1 In W.P.No.

[5] C.P. No. 205 -L/2017 2 Authority ("OGRA") under the Oil and Gas Regulatory Aut hority Ordinance, 2002 ("Ordinance") and Ombudsman had no jurisdiction over such like matter s. The writ petition was decided through t he impugned order in favour of R espondent No.1 on 13.12.2016 and the said order, as per the learned counsel for the partie s has not been challenged before this Court by the parties. 2.

[6] The petitioner before us is the Wafaqi Mohtasib 's Secretariat (not the Ombudsman) with the prayer that order of the High Court be set aside. The alleged grievance of the petitioner , as disclo sed in the petition , arises from the curtailment of the jurisdiction and powers of the Ombudsman in matte rs pertaining to gas detection bills and meter tampering which fall under the OGRA Ordinance.

[7] Without going into the merits of the case or commenting u pon the merits of the impugned judgment , the primary question before us is whether Wafaqi Mohtasib ’s Secretariat (or for that matter even the Ombudsman ) could maintain the instant petition by challenging the order of the High Court whereby the jurisdiction and powers of the Ombudsman under the Establishment of the office of the Wafaqi Mohtasib (Ombudsman) Order, 1983 (“Order , 1983 ”) read with the Federal Ombudsman Institutional Reforms Act, 2013 (“Act”) have been interpreted and determined.

[8] How is the Wafaq i Mohtasib’s Secretariat or the Wafaqi Mohtasib (Ombudsman) aggrieved by the impugned order ? And more importantly , can the Ombudsman and his secretariat be aggrieved of an order which interprets and determines the jurisdiction and powers of the Wafaqi Moh tasib under the Order and the Act ? 3.

[9] Perusal of Order , 1983 reveals that Wafaqi Mohtasib ’s Secretariat is not a legal entity, infact it is not a defined term under Order, 19832 and does not enjoy a ny le gal status or the power to sue or be sued under the law. Wafaqi Mohtasib’s Secretariat is at best an administrative term and refers to the establishment of the offices of the Ombudsman under Wafaqi Mohtasib (Investigation and Disposal of Complaints) Regulations, 2003 .

[10] The filing of the instant petition by the Wafaqi Mohtasib’s 2 “Secretariat” is defined in Regulation 2(m) of the Wafaqi Mohtasib (Investig ation and Disposal of Complaints) Regulations, 2003 to mean: “the entire establishment of Mohta sib, including the Head Office and Regional Offices.” C.P. No. 205 -L/2017 3 Secretariat is, therefore, hopelessly misconceived as it has no locus standi to maintain the instant petition. 4.

[11] Assuming , for the sake of argument , that the petition was filed by the Ombudsman , as he was arrayed as a respondent in the writ petition. Still the question arises, whether the Ombudsman is an aggrieved person in the instant matter ? The answer to this question requires an understanding of the distinction between the two roles enjoyed by the Ombudsman under Order , 1983 .

[12] One is personal, that relates to the terms and conditions of service of the Ombudsman; while the other is the neutral quasi -judicial institutional role (or statutory ) of the Ombudsman to “redress and rectify” mal -administration. In the first case the Ombuds man can be (personally) aggrieved regarding any order that affects his terms and conditions of service under Order, 1983 , as that would be affecting his rights to service under the law.

[13] However, in the second case, the Ombudsman , cannot be said to be aggri eved, if the powers to redress mal -administration vested in him under the law are modified (enhanced or curtailed) by the Parliament or through interpretation of the constitutional court. Challeng ing the powers would be challenging the law and intent of th e Parliament .

[14] Ombudsman, being a creature of the statute, cannot challenge the powers vested in him by the legislature, however, the parties to the proceedings may bring such a challenge. The powers enjoyed by the Ombudsman cannot be confused with his rights under the law. 5. Another way to look at it is that a neutral quasi judicial adjudicatory forum created under a statute cannot become a party to the proceedings brought before it .

[15] Such a forum is to simply to redress mal-administration by exercising i ts powers under the law . The Ombudsman by law and by design is not empowered to defend its decisions before a higher forum by becoming a party to the proceedings. This would t otally tarnish its neutrality. 6. For the above reasons, even the Ombudsman has no locus standi to chall enge an order passed by the c onstitutional court that interprets its jurisdiction or powers under the law .

[16] C.P. No. 205 -L/2017 4 Therefore, the instant petition filed by the Wafaqi Mohtasib’s Secretariat is hopelessly misconceived and not maintainable . 7. The filing of this petition by the Wafaqi Mohtasib’s Secretariat through its Secretary has left us concerned and disturbed. We, therefore, direct the Ombudsman to hold an inquiry into the matter and submit a report to th is Court within two months from today as to who had authorized t he filing of the instant petition and the action taken against the concerned officials. 8.

[17] This hopelessly misconceived petition passes for frivolous litigation and has resulted in wasting the time of the court. Therefore, this petition is dismissed with costs of Rs.100,000/ - imposed under Order XXVIII, Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules, 1980 . The costs shall be deposited with any approved, recognized and well -known Charitable Organization and receipt thereof be submitted w ith the Deputy Registrar of this Court (Lahore Registry) within two months from today.

[18] In case of failure to comply with the directions in this paragraph or paragraph 7 (above), the office shall fix this petition before the Court for necessary orders. Leave is, therefore, declined and this petition stands dismissed with costs. Lahore , 11th August, 2020 . Approved for reporting Iqbal Judge Judge