Case No: C.P.115/2012
Case Title: Abdul Rahim Ziaratwal and others v. Federation of Pakistan and others
Subject: Miscelleneous
Judge: Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry
Judgment Date: 22-07-2013
Upload Date: 22-07-2013
Citations: 2014 SCMR 873
SC Citations: 2013 SCP 100
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Const.P.115-2012etc.pdf

[1] ORDER IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ. - As far as the judgment in listed Constitution Petition No.115 of 2011 instituted by petitioner Abdul Rahim Ziaratwal and connected Constitution Petition No.2  on the subject “Action against Distribution of Development Funds by Ex -Prime Minister of Pakistan Raja Parvez Ashraf ”, is concerned, the same is reserved. 2.

[2] However, in the meanwhile, with regards to the Schemes initiated out of the funds allocated to the PW P-II, the Executin g Agencies are directed to undertake an exercise and examine across the board all the Schemes so as to ascertain as to whether the PEPRA Rules Const.P.No.. 4 have been strictly followed and whether the development works were assigned to the Contractors in a transparent m anner keeping in view the recognized standards for award of execution of such works; and whether the said schemes were based on feasible reports.

[3] If such Schemes are found to be in accordance with the conditions and observations made hereinabove the paymen ts to the Contractors may be released to the extent of the work already completed. 3. As far as the left over work is concerned, it should be examined as to whether the same is in the public interest and is feasible to continue execution of the said sche mes.

[4] If such schemes are found not to be in the public interest or feasible, the same shall be abandoned subject to the approval of the Competent Authority i.e . on whose behalf the Schemes were initiated ; and the funds so made available shall be deposited with the public exchequer. The said Competent Authority shall also examine the possibility of proceeding further against such persons or agenc ies, who had allowed the execution of the works/schemes contrary to the PEPRA Rules, proper feasibilities or witho ut following a transparent manner ; before the Forums having jurisdiction to deal with such issues both civil as well as criminal, as the case may be.

[5] Chief Justice Judge Islamabad, the 22nd July, 2013 Not approved for repor ting Judge M. Safdar Mahmood/*