Case No: C.P.5/2024
Case Title: Public at Large v. Capital Development Authority and another
Subject: U/A 184(3)
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa
Judgment Date: 27-02-2024
Upload Date: 27-02-2024
Citations: NA
SC Citations: 2024 SCP 82
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/const.p._5_2024.pdf

[1] ORDER 1. Pursuant to order dated 27 February 2024 , which was in respect of the tree -cutting/deforestation taking pl ace in the Fatima Jinnah Park , situated in the F-9 Sector of Islamabad (‘ the Park ’) the Commissioners appointed by the Court have submitted their joint report (CMA No. ) and video recordings.

[2] In case the Capital Development Authority (‘ CDA’) has a ny objection to the report the same be filed before the next date of hearing. Const. P. No.  2 2. CDA has filed CMA No.  in response to the questions in the said order and informs that it did massive plantation in the 1970s of paper mulberry trees (Broussonetia papyrifera ), but later discovered that it causes pollen allergy, therefore, it was decided to remove all such trees from Islamabad, including from the Park which has their largest concentration. 3. ‘Open Auction Notice’ was published by the Director Envir onment, CDA inviting bids from contractors to undertake the removal of paper mulberry trees and other invasive species.

[3] Mr. Shah Nazar was selected as the contractor as he had offered the highest amount for the timber to be removed, that is, five million and two hundred thousand rupees, at the rate of 66.94 per cubic foot. As per CDA approximately 7 ,000 paper mulberry trees were removed from different patches and packets of 55 acres of the Park. 4.

[4] However , photographs and recording shows that the area has been denuded of all trees and vegetation. We enquired whether paper mulberry trees were marked and it transpire s that the work was undertaken by the contractor himself. It would be in the interest of the contractor to remove other trees too whose timber value is greater.

[5] CDA employs about 4,500 gardeners but they could not have undertaken the said work because, we are told, CDA does not have the requisite saws and other paraphernalia to cut/remove and uproot the trees. We also enquired why was not a contra ct not given only for the removal of paper mulberry trees and once they were cut down/removed to have sold them but did not receive a satisfactory answer.

[6] CDA hand ed over the entire work to the contractor, who appears to have worked unsupervised . All trees and vegetation seems to have been cut, despite the fact that they take years to grow and play a useful role. 5. We are greatly concerned with the manner in which the land has been cleared of all vegetation, not just paper mulberry trees .

[7] It would be appr opriate to seek the assistance of Mr. M ahmood Nasir and Syed Ghulam Qadir Shah , both of whom are retired Inspector Generals of Forest s, to assist this Court with regard to whether the manner in which CDA had the trees and vegetation removed from the Park was in accord ance with good practice principles and how best to proceed in the future.

[8] Office is directed to send copy of this Const. P. No.  3 order and order dated 27 February 2024 to them together with copies of CMA Nos. 1603 and 1607 of 2024. Till the next date of heari ng no further trees shall be cut nor to undertake further deforestation. Chief Justice Judge Judge Islamabad 04.03.2024 (M.