Case No: C.P.L.A.3031/2021
Case Title: Maqbool Ahmed Mahessar and others v. Executive Engineer Highways Division Kamber-Shahdadkot and others
Subject: Bail Before Arrest
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed
Judgment Date: 04-05-2021
Upload Date: 07-05-2021
Citations: 2021 SCMR 1166
SC Citations: 2021 SCP 128
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._3031_2021.pdf

[1] order dated 17.03.2021 in Const. P.D- , ,  and order dated 10.3.2021 in Const. P. No.D - passed by the High Court of Sindh ) Maqbool Ahmed Mahessar & 2 others (in C.P. ) Hafiz Suhail Ahmed & 3 others (in C.P. ) Muhammad Pariyal So langi (in C.P. ) Nasrullah (in C.P. ) …Petitioner (s) Versus NAB through its Chairman and others (in all cases) …Respondent (s) For the Petitioner(s): Mr.

[2] Mohammad Kassim Mirjat, ASC/AOR (In CP. ) Mr. Zulf iqar Khalid Maluka, ASC (In CP. 1183, 1184,) For the NAB: Abdus Sattar Awan, Special Prosecutor, NAB. (in all cases ) Date of hearing: 04.05.2021 ORDER Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Issue raised in the captioned petitions is identical with the one earlier attended and disposed of by this Court in a good number of cases, vide order dated 14.04.2021 whereby bail petitions both pre as well as post arrest , in different NAB references , allowed by a learned Division Bench of High Court of Sin dh at Sukkur Bench, in lieu of deposit of amounts allegedly embezzled by the accused named therein , were remitted for decision afresh in accord with the law declared by this Court in the case of Talat Ishaq Vs.

[3] National Accountability Bureau (PLD 2019 Supr eme Court 12). 2 Civil Petition Nos., ,  and  From amongst the petitioners, Hafiz Sohail (C.P. ), Muhammad Pariyal Solangi (C.P. ) and Nasrullah (C.P.  ) are not in attendance, statedly, on account of Covid restrictions, standing in impediment to their journey to the Court ; their attendance is dispensed with ; they, along with co-accused , present before the Court , by impugned orders, each structured on consent, have been admitted to pre -arrest bail s in different NAB references with a direction to furnish deposi ts equivalent to the amounts allegedly embezzled by them at the cost of public exchequer.

[4] Such directions for release of an accused on bail have since been held by this Court as ultra vires in judgments more than one . An accused seeking bail desires transf er of his custody from Superintendent of the Jail , where he is confined , to his surety who undertakes his production as and when required by the Court and for that he has to make out a case in accordance with the law applicable thereto ; he cannot be allowe d or required to barter his freedom .

[5] In the supra case consideration s for grant of post arrest bail to an accused confronting charge under the NAB Ordinance have clearly been illustrated, therefore, an accused facing indictment in a NAB reference has to qu alify the parameters set down in the supra case; there is no other way out . Similarly, grant of pre -arrest bail in a cognizable/non -bailable offence is a remedy, most extraordinary in the nature of judicial protection, extended by diverting usual course of law for the sole purpose of protecting reputation and honour of an innocent citizen , being hounded through abuse of process of law for purposes sinister and oblique ; the protection is based upon equity and cannot be extended in every run of the mill crimi nal case prima facie founded upon incriminatory evidence , warranting custody for investigative purposes .

[6] The protection was devised in Hidayat Ullah Khan’s case (PLD 1949 Lahore 1 ) and the principles laid down therein are being faithfully followed till dat e; impugned orders being inconsistent therewith cannot sustain . Petitions are converted into appeals and allowed; orders impugned are set aside. Bail petitions filed by the appellants before the High Court of Sindh shall be deemed as pending for decisions afresh; they shall remain on ad-interim bail upon furnishing bonds in the sum of Rs.500,000/ - with one surety each in the like amount to the satisfaction of Deputy Registrar 3 Civil Petition Nos., ,  and  (Judicial) of Sukkur Bench before fall of 3rd week of the month; they shall appear in person before the Court on a date notified by the office .

[7] It is expected that the petitions shall be decided/disposed of with all convenient dispatch on their own merits having regard to the law declared by this Court . Judge Judge Judge Islamabad 4th May, 2021 Azmat /*