Case No: C.P.62/2010
Case Title: Flood Commission
Subject: N/A
Judge: Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry
Judgment Date: 07-06-2011
Upload Date: 07-06-2011
Citations: PLD 2011 SC 854
SC Citations: 2011 SCP 29
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Const.P.NO.62OF2010_orderdt06062011.pdf

[1] ORDER Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry , CJ. :- These petitions have been filed under Article 184(3) of the Constitution and by invoking Suo Moto Jurisdiction of this Court with respective prayers noted therein. The facts of the petitions in a nutshell are that in the month of July/August, 2010 due to unprecedented flood devastation the citizens of the country suffered huge los ses against their lives and properties.

[2] The flood had commenced from province of Khyber Pakht unkhwa and flowed u pto Arabian Sea at Thatta, as is evident from the following picture: - 2. This Court vide order dated 15.12.2010, constituted a Commission comprising M/s Muhammad Azam Khan, former Chief Secretary, Khyber -Pakhtunkhwa, Fateh Khan Khajjak, former Chief Secretary, B alochistan, A.

[3] W. Kazi, former Cabinet Secretary, Government of Pakistan, and Kh. Zaheer Ahmed, former Federal Secretary, Government o f Pakistan. The terms of Reference, laid down in the form of formulations / questions were as under: - 1) Whether embankment breaches during the period of high floods in Indus River are subject to any procedure to be 3 followed by the authorities at the re levant time, if so, what is the manner of exercising of such powers and by whom and under what circumstances? 2) Whether in the floods in River Indus in the months of July and August, 2010, procedure for embankment breaches was followed judiciously? 3) Whether before ordering embankment breaches at different places, particularly at Ali Wahn and Tori Bund, no procedure was followed, if so, who is responsible for the same? 4) Whether before embankment breaches at different places, precautionary measures w ere adopted, particularly in view of warnings issued from time to time by the metrological department of Pakistan? 5) Whether the beneficiaries, if any, responsible for embankment breaches to save their properties / crops etc, are also responsible for th e losses sustained by the affectees? 6) What is the approximate volume of losses sustained by the affectees and Government during the floods? 7) Whether relief was extended to the flood affectees on war footings or not? 8) Jacobabad Airport was availabl e for flood relief operations, if so then why the relief goods were not sent to affectees on urgent basis? 9) What is the pace of rehabilitation in the flood devastated areas? 10) Whether flood affectees are entitled for damages and compensation from the Government of Pakistan or from the persons who were benefited from the embankment breaches? 11) Whether administrations of the Provinc ial Governments in private and official capacity are responsible for failing to manage affairs of flood affectees justly o r properly, if so, what action is suggested against them? 4 12) Whether embankment of River Indus was being maintained annually, if not so, who is responsible for the same? 13) Who was responsible for bre aches that took place at T ori Bund and Ali Wahn Bund? 3.

[4] After hearing all the parties and on the basis of oral and documentary evidence, related information in public domain and its interaction with the affectees, the Commission submitted report , supported by hundreds of documents which have been kept separately in the record and shall always be available for inspection , if need be.

[5] The findings of the Commission read as under :- “1. Whether embankment breaches during the period of high floods in Indus River are subject to any procedure to be followed by the authorities at the relevant time, if so, what is the manner of exercising of such powers and by whom and under what circumstances? Findings a.

[6] From Diamir -Bhasha downwards upto D.I. Khan, Indus River flows through KP and the Punjab; KP is not threatened by the Indus, nor any SOP for flood embankments was currently in vogue in the Province. b. Jinnah and Taunsa Barrages on the Indus are being maintained by the Punjab and Chashma Barrage is maintained by the WAPDA. c.

[7] Pre-designated breaching sections have been earmarked for the Right Guide Bund (RGB), upstream Jinnah Barrage for activation before the water levels threaten the barrage safety; for the purpose, an inter -agency civil -military committee has been notified by the Provincial Government to determine on -spot justification and its precise timing for activation by Army’s Engineers. d.

[8] The current SOPs do not authorise breaches in Left Guide Bund (LGB) or Left Marginal Bund (LMB) of Jinnah Barrage in the Punjab or for any other bunds in the Punjab or Sindh, as such. On the contrary, all bunds are required to be maintained for safety of the people, farms and property, as per specified guidelines. 2.

[9] Whether in the floods in River Indus in the months of July and August, 2010, procedure for embankment breaches was followed judiciously? Findings a. In the Punjab, pre -designated breaches in RGB upstream Jinnah Barrage were operationalized to save the Barrage by use of explosives through the Army Engineers, on 31st 5 July 2010 after due process and diligence by the not ified inter-agency committee. b.

[10] Other major breaches, including those in the LGB/LMB of Jinnah Barrage, LMB of Taunsa Barrage and its secondary Sunawan Bund in Muzaffargarh, Jampur Bund and Fakhhar Bund in Kot Mithan, of Rajanpur district were not cause d by direct human interventions, nor permissible as such under any SOPs. A host of factors & reasons contributed to these breaches: Pre -flood poor maintenance, existence of private bunds in the river belt, non-observance of barrage gate regulations at crit ical hours, use of incompatible quality of material for rehabilitation of LMB on Taunsa and conceptual and design issues and motivated considerations of the duty staff, inconsistent with officially approved plans, besides complacency were noted. c.

[11] In Sindh also, no breach to any bunds was authorized but these occurred in case of Tori and its loop bunds due to pre -flood negligence,poor maintenance and attempts to remove earth from the crest. In case of MS and PB Bunds in Thatta Sujawal, observed indiffere nce, before and during the flood season and illegal practices in and around the bunds contributed to the breaches. 3.

[12] Whether before ordering embankment breaches at different places, particularly at Aliwahan and Tori Bund, no procedure was followed, if so, who is responsible for the same? Findings a. The Tori Bund suffered years of neglected maintenance; its height had eroded substantially, and ‘dangerously’, long before the flood season; last minute, misdirected departmental attempt to remove earth from its crest to fill the ‘Garrahs’ [deep pits] on the riverside of the Bund in wee hours of 6/7th August further reduced its height in gross violation of specified guidelines; the public viewed that as a deliberate attempt to breach.

[13] At the relevant time, the Chi ef Engineer, Guddu, camped at Tori Rest House, and his team, especially the XEN in -charge, failed to take timely remedial measures; they were directly responsible for consequential losses in Sindh and Balochistan. b. The case of Aliwahan Bund was, however, s omewhat different; it was not breached during 2010 floods.

[14] High level consultations amongst political and civil -military officials including Federal, and Provincial political personages assembled at Sukkar for two days decided against this breach; in fac t, the petitioner’s case was that Aliwahan bund should have been breached. 4. Whether before embankment breaches at different places, precautionary measures were adopted, particularly in view of warnings issued from time to time by the meteorological depart ment of Pakistan? Findings a.

[15] The bunds are spread over thousands of km and had suffered extensive erosions before and during the 2010 Flood; most vulnerable amongst these had been placed 6 under special focus for precautionary measures against any conti ngency, too. The pre -flood surveys by civil - military teams to check the status of these structures, as also required by respective District Disaster Plans were treated as a routine.

[16] However, specific evidence was not produced to confirm or deny whether the se inspections fulfilled the official instructions had been complied in letter, much less the spirit of statutory obligations of the Ordinance LIII of 2007, since converted into an Act of Parliament in December 2010. In many cases, field inspections were c laimed, but not even recorded. b.

[17] The PMD’s revised forecast was late, but sufficient time was still available, particularly for authorities in southern Punjab and Sindh to take corrective and preventive measures. However, these were not effective, part icularly as extremely wide margins were noted in the PMD’s flood predictions and actual flows due to unguaged torrents, streams and rivers. 5.

[18] Whether the beneficiaries, if any, responsible for embankment breaches to save their properties/crops etc, are also responsible for the losses sustained by the affectees? Findings In principle, causing wrongful loss to any one is a penal offence, irrespective of whether the perpetrator gains from that act or not? However, in the case under inquiry, though unprecede nted losses were inflicted by acts and omissions of concerned officials in the irrigation hierarchies, no specific evidence was produced to establish wrongful gain by any specific individual, except general and at times vague allegations and opinions on management of irrigation works and ways & means to protect the infrastructures: e.g. a.

[19] In the Punjab, the CE & SE at Jinnah Barrage did not ensure pre -flood preparations, including mandatory stocking of loose stones to plug the potential breaches or to check non-compliance and report deficiencies in accordance with approved Flood Protection Plan for the 2010 season. b. The CE at Jinnah Barrage and PMO Taunsa Barrage, both failed to ensure observance of barrage regulations, demonstrate effective control or super vision over their subordinates, especially after 21st July PMD warning for acting in accordance with approved Flood Protection Plan for the 2010 season. c.

[20] In case of Tori, MS and PB Bunds in two irrigation regions of Sindh, the then Secretary, Irrigation and two Chief Engineers of Guddu and Kotri Barrages, failed to take timely corrective measures to save affectees from the losses to which they were exposed, both in Sindh and Balochistan. d. The then Secretary Irrigation Sindh and CE Guddu not only misrepresent ed facts before the Commission, at Islamabad and the SE Kotri on site at Thatta, knowing these to be false and deliberately suppressed evidence of their respective culpability. 6.

[21] What is the approximate volume of losses sustained by the affectees and Gov ernment during the floods? 7 Findings a. Mundane Nationwide Losses of Infrastructure: (i) Rs 855 billion, of which over 65% was by private peoples, excluding complete loss of one additional Rabi crop, in Jaffarabad District of Naseerabad Division in Balochis tan. (ii) The gross loss is almost 5.8% of the GDP and at par with debt servicing allocations for fiscal 2010 -11. (iii) Public expenses by civil and defence establishments from their own allocations are not reflected in the above losses. b.

[22] Indirect Losses : (i) Loss of human lives: 1,600, compensated or to be compensated @ Rs. 500,000/ per death. (ii) Loss of one -half of academic sessions of some 7.0 million school going children. (iii) Loss of jobs: 4.5 million, mostly farm labour. (iv) Exposure to diseases and malnutrition of 20 mi llion people. 7.

[23] Whether relief was extended to the flood affectees on war footings or not? Finding Despite glaring cases of inadequate attention in many areas, the magnitude and scale of the disaster and the speed with which it unfolded in first phase du ring July 27 -12th August, the overall rescue and relief operations launched and logistics mobilized at all levels including public responses constituted an impressive chapter of managerial history, particularly, if regard was paid to prevailing organizatio nal erosion since 1969.

[24] Both civil and military establishments mobilized whatever they could; the NGOs extended full cooperation to the affectees. The administration in KP and the Punjab remained most visibly active. 8. Jacobabad Airport was available for f lood relief operations, if so then why the relief goods were not sent to affectees on urgent basis? Finding Presence of sizeable number of foreign personnel at the Jacobabad Airbase for sometime was confirmed; that may have created a perception of its ina ccessibility for relief goods.

[25] The foreign nationals were reportedly employed to train and assist PAF staff for upgrading facilities, before arrival of the new batch of F-16 planes, due by December 2010, at that time. However, the number of relief flights, flown in and out of Jacobabad airport, during August and September do not substantiate that it remained inaccessible, except on technical grounds of capacity constraints.

[26] The PAF confirmed that the base provided a virtual air-bridge for relief operations, in an area, otherwise cut off from rest of the province for many weeks; that contradicted the assertion of closure of the facility for relief assistance . 8 9. What is the pace of rehabilitation in the flood devastated areas? Findings The Planning Commission has developed a hard core portfolio of priority works for restoration of damaged infrastructure at a cost of Rs. 277 billion, in next 3 years.

[27] The program has been designed in consultation with federating units and International Development Partners. It w as, however, conditional to part funding by the DFIs. It contains sectoral / regional schemes for immediate to short -term execution. The main component of Rehabilitation programmes include: a.

[28] Rehabilitation of Affectees : (i) Most affectees have returned to their native places, except in Sindh and Jaffarabad district of Naseerabad Division of Balochistan where some relief camps are still operating, as pre -conditions conducive to revival of life and living have not been restored. (ii) Compensation of first tranche of Rs.20,000 per household to rebuild/ repair houses, contributed by Federal and Provincial Governments on 50:50 basis has almost been completed, except cases being re - verified for various reasons of imperfect documentation or cases of observed anomalies. (iii) Remaining payment of Rs.80,000/ per household is expected to commence after disbursement of loans from WB/ ADB etc.

[29] The Provinces have used this delay for recertification of the contested claims. (iv) Some friendly countries and NGOs have donated / offered con struction of model villages following Build Back Better [BBB] policy with necessary civic amenities; the work is steadily progressing on ground. b. Restoration of Irrigation Infrastructure : (i) The Farm sector activity has been revived in the provinces , except directly affected districts of Jaffarabad and Jhal Magsi in Balochistan; for the latter two areas, the Hon’able Court has issued orders for time bound restoration of irrigation supplies in the light of interim recommendations of the Commission. (ii) KP and the Punjab reacted promptly to restore losses to irrigation network from their own resources. (iii) The Sindh Government did not move as promptly as expected; however, it finally prioritized execution of 39 development schemes worth Rs.5,000 million, for re habilitation of bunds / canals commenced after receipt of 50% federal subvention, in early March 2011. (iv) Balochistan too did not initiate rehabilitation of farm sector in Naseerabad Division, with requisite urgency pending restoration of damaged infrastruct ure in Sindh due to paucity of funds. 9 10.

[30] Whether flood affectees are entitled for damages and compensation from the Government of Pakistan or from the persons who were benefited from the embankment breaches? Findings a. The Calamities Act 1958 did not obli gate compensation for losses on account of any natural disaster, much less 1947 type claims.

[31] However, as a natural social compassion, ex -gratia ad -hoc compensation is invariably provided to affectees in distress or victims exposed to natural or man -made di sasters beyond their bearing capacity. The governments also remit abyana and land revenue in calamity affected areas. With the promulgation of the NDMA Ordinance/Act, however, fixation of an objective scale for compensation has become a statutory duty.

[32] For the 2010 Flood, a scale of compensation was approved by the ECC. The ECC approval did not, however, take into account where affectees lost their land to rivers or landslides in mountains. The NDMC or other provincial bodies under the Ordinance LIII of 200 7 did not adopt the ECC’s political guidelines, formally.

[33] A limited insurance cover by ZTBL window is available to farmers but it was/is not availed by most. b. As noted in the Commissions’ findings under formulation No 5 supra, no proof of wrongful gains was produced, though extensive losses were suffered, as stated above. 11. Whether administrations of the Provincial Governments in private and official capacity are responsible for failing to manage affairs of flood affectees justly or properly, if so, what a ction is suggested against them? Finding : Primary source of disaster was attributable to the collapse of irrigation structures, new and old, that caused unprecedented damages to rest of the public and private infrastructure and property.

[34] However, the magn itude of losses is so large, that no individual or government was in a position to compensate for the losses on stand alone basis, at least immediately. The more so, as for over three decades, Pakistan’s scarce resources have been diverted to unwelcome war s imposed during extra -constitutional regimes, without peoples’ sanction since widened to a three -dimensional security threat, from within and without, under extraordinary conditions.

[35] Following measures may be considered: a. The action against officials of t he Punjab government held responsible for acts of omission and Commission as identified by the Punjab Judicial Commission be proceeded against in due process. b. The Governments may sensitize the WB about the direct and indirect losses caused by breach in T aunsa’s LMB that had cascading effect on other bunds with request to absorb expenditure on (a) above, plus other compensation for the affectee -farmers in Muzaffargarh District. c.

[36] In Sindh also, the then Secretary Irrigation and Chief Engineer Guddu be tho roughly investigated under direct 10 supervision of Sindh High Court, to account for their failure to take timely preventive measures, reasonably predicted in February 2010 and before, with respect to Tori Bund and the acts and omissions leading to its eventu al collapse after the onset of heavy rains on 27th July 2010 in KP and G -B and consequent floods. d.

[37] Likewise, the CE and SE Kotri be subjected to explain their failures to rectify and repair MS and PB Bunds, despite four -week advance warning. e. Special audit of all the provincial irrigation works executed during last 10 years at least, be conducted. f. Strengthening of Federal Flood Commission and oversight of the NDMA as per law. g.

[38] In the immediate to short term Farmers’ association may be encouraged to persuade their members to avail insurance cover through ‘Zarai Taraqiati Bank’ (ZTBL) window. h. Long-term bonds may be issued to farmers having subsistence holdings, through ZTBL, as a token of recognition of their damages suffered due to consistent official neglec t. 12.

[39] Whether embankment of River Indus was being maintained annually, if not so, who is responsible for the same? Finding : Most embankments were not maintained, as required and specified in SOPs; this also reflected mis -match in resource allocations, exce pt in case of LMB on Taunsa, rehabilitated in 2008-2009 at a considerable cost under a WB funded project.

[40] Most breaches also indicated serious organizational and managerial issues impinging upon professionals’ apathy besides being an indicator of widesprea d corrupt practices in the hierarchy . That is also due to disproportionate commitment to canal water distribution under political influences; local committees and user -charges for recovery of maintenance funds may be considered, as offered by KP farmers to improve communication for timely actions. 13.

[41] Who was responsible for breaches that took place at Thori Bund and Ali Wahn Bund? Finding: As noted under TOR no. 3 above, the Tori breach was attributable primarily to negligence of CE Guddu and his team; his immediate supervisor, the then Secretary Irrigation and author of the revised Bund Manual, was equally, if not more, culpable with them, on two counts: Firstly, failure to ensure upgradation of the bund before 2010 Flood as mandated by the IRC on 4th February 2010; and Secondly, for suppressing evidence, with an attempt to mislead the Commission, knowing full well about pre -flood state of Tori Bund; they both committed perjury, knowing it to be such.

[42] The last minute shifting of Irrigation ’s Minister’s por tfolio needs to be explored too, by the political leadership in that context to rule out manipulation or divert the focus of failed bunds from departmental acts and omissions to political leadership, notwithstanding the confusion compounded by his irrespon sible statement.

[43] The Urdu translation of the said findings is as under: - 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 4. The Commission after examination of evidence and the relevant record made the following concluding remarks: - “CONCLUDING REMARKS 67. The adumbration of the above evidence, the information and the Commission’s field visits when related to the relevant official instructions and observed practices established that: - a.

[44] The NDMA’s lead role in coordination of rescue and relief phases during and after the floods to save life, if not the property, was outstanding, by any standard. But it did not put in position pre -disaster structural framework or administrative network mandated in 2006 or contemplated by the NDMA Ordinance 2007 (LIII of 2007) o r 2009 Ordinance, despite passage of over 42 months till June 2010 or later to -date. b.

[45] The PMD’s rain forecasts were timely but its estimations regarding flood discharges were not as accurate as it was generally perceived; the FFD 19 needed to factor in the flows from hill torrents and along other rivers where no gauges are installed; the need to boost its capacity to forecast beyond 4 -days advance warning as compared to 10 -days international best was also established; during flood season 2010, its 28th June assessment was off the mark within 3 -weeks.

[46] More than that, scientific simulations and weather modelling approach by highly qualified mathematical models could also generate better outcomes. The PMD should not have ignored international assessments except at a great peril, even if these did not conform to its wildest estimations, knowing in -house technical capacity constraints. c.

[47] The KP did not have the occasion or adequate time to plan or act against flash floods, but in terms of response time and action s, it acted fast to restore the damaged irrigation supplies through make -shift arrangements that enabled most farmers to plant a bumper Rabi crop for 2010 -11 to help revive life and living of most affected people as many lost their lands to the river actio n. d.

[48] The Punjab had limited but reasonable notice for preventive measures and for issuing warnings to people. While threat to Jinnah Barrage was averted, other breaches including the breaches to LGB/LMB of Jinnah Barrage and those induced by human interve ntion could have been checked, partly or wholly, to minimize loss of life and property, though these had indirectly but considerably benefited by easing out the pressure on controlled irrigation structures in Sindh. e.

[49] Like KP, the Punjab administration i n coordination with Armed Forces also led the operations from the front, for rescue and relief inter -alia to restore/ replace two most damaged LMBs within record time and speed, by associating private sector and by invoking emergency codes, designed for su ch eventualities; that prevented damages from 2nd peak of flood flows.

[50] The Provincial administrations led by example. This Commission would not like to make any further observation on that account in view of inherent limitations of subjecting executive jud gements in crisis to retroactive wisdom except to ward off future pitfalls. But projects executed under emergency provisions be subjected to special audit, as a policy. f.

[51] In view of sharp political divide in the Muzaffargarh and DG Khan, possibility of mi schief in inflicting cuts or politically motivated charges could not be conclusively ruled out as besides FIRs, almost 100 writs were filed in LHC from hese Districts. g. The officials in -charge of irrigation structures responsible for inefficiency, neglig ence or corrupt practices identified in departmental inquiries are expected to be proceeded against under due process.

[52] This Commission would not like to make any further observations with respect to officials’ subject matter of inquiry of Punjab Judicial C ommission. 20 h. The then Secretary Irrigation, Sindh and the then Chief Engineer Guddu were well aware of the poor state of Tori Bund long before the 2010 Flood; they had adequate time and to attend to that work but failed to move in time. i.

[53] The then Chief Engineer Guddu, by his own admission, and his immediate superior, the Secretary Irrigation, had failed to anticipate the expected level of flood waters at Guddu Barrage that inundated Sindh’s three major districts besides Balochistan’s Jaffarabad district. j. Both Chief Engineer Guddu and the then Secretary Irrigation consciously and deliberately, tried to attribute disaster due to inadequate maintenance and funding constraints during yester -years, besides justifying former’s absence from the Tori Bund brea ch site at the critical time for reasons of heavy rainfall that never was, and the claim that that made vehicular tour of the bund impossible.

[54] Especially in view of his own PC -I of 4th February 2010 and Planning Commission’s consensus document that rebut t he factum of over -topping. k. The SEs and XENs incharge of the breached bunds in Guddu and Kortri command areas are likewise responsible. l. The 2010 Flood in Sindh was unprecedented to the extent of duration of the peak flows though the discharges wer e lower than the 1976 Flood. m.

[55] The pre and post Flood 2010 IRC proceedings contradicted in material terms Mr. Junejo’s contention, that most bunds other than those directly raised in the subject matter of petitions were maintained at reasonable level of r epair. n. The possibility that certain elements within the Irrigation hierarchies mislead its political leadership regarding benefits of creation of additional water storage cannot be ruled out. o.

[56] The World Bank programme on drainage in last three deca des and Taunsa Rehabilitation project may be reviewed to ensure transparency especially in the context of technology transfer and training of local professionals and Para -technical staff. p. The packages prepared for the restoration of irrigation works an d embankments had a cost factor of Rs.61 billion in Sindh alone, and the consensus DNA of Rs.11 billion raises legitimate and serious concerns in respect of departmental practices. q.

[57] AGP may also undertake special audit of funds expended in last 10 -years for irrigation sector including review of its own reports. 68. It was stated that in many areas people ignored warnings about impending disasters for various reasons. Manifest disconnect at local levels may have made them brush aside implicit or explic it dangers for public infrastructure, large and small, standing agricultural crops by unsuspecting / ill -prepared people, 21 limited access to TV network further impeded by uneven load -shedding in rural areas, pre -occupation with fasting and worship. 69.

[58] Given the imperfect nature of observed communication with the affectees and their sympathisers, as water flows increased, perceptions mixed with reality compounded the confusion. Parliamentary debates did not dispel adverse public perceptions, both woven by design or with effort. Meantime, the official credibility touched a new low; numbers were no longer relevant; even one complainant was too many to generate media blitz.

[59] The local and national media chased the waters, as brave men and women anchors and publ ic representatives repeatedly flagged to the authorities about areas of default, real or potential, suggesting absence of coordinated response. The HR Petitions filed by two Parliamentarians, one each from both sides of the divide, including the Deputy Cha irman, Senate of Pakistan who sent a letter to Hon’ble Court through a leading Jurist , and an energetic lady Member of the National Assembly, amongst others, who chose to travel extensively on the water trail and documented the media coverage, members of t he Bar and general public, all opted to invoke Article 184 (3) Jurisdiction of the apex Court. 70.

[60] In areas with sharp political divisions, intense public debates focussed on malicious breaches, to allegations of favours to local influentials who manage to secure appointments for their loyal supporters, inadequacy of assistance rendered alongside questions impinging on fairness in distribution and disbursements, both in the context of Federating units and marooned people who awaited rescue operations thro ugh transport planes and Heli -lifting relief supplies in many inaccessible areas were voiced by media.

[61] Not to be left alone, international communities also voiced their concerns, some indirectly, others were not so subtle. Though it realized the dimension of the fast unfolding disaster a bit late, to offer support, on 18th August 2010, the UN Secretary General convened a special Session in which Foreign Governments, DFIs, UN Specialized Agencies and other International Organizations to made generous pledges for donations and/or loans for the people whose blood and resources had been overstretched by the war imposed on them; rhetoric dominated disbursements.

[62] The reports that international community had honoured only 50% of the pledged contributions in the UN sponsored Funding appeal finally led to composition of the NODMC, created with Provincial representation to oversee and guide fairly and justly the Reconstruction and Rehabilitation plans. 71. The processing of loans by DFI’s also took its time and paymen t of 2nd tranche of Rs.80,000/ household was delayed, leading to frustrated expectations; these multiplied complaints of inaction or negligence.

[63] From the material brought on record, it was established that Federal & Provincial Governments and local adminis trations, supported by general public, political workers, local and international NGOs, all joined hands to launch the humanitarian assistance on 22 unprecedented dimensions, unfamiliar for its management structures eroded systematically and subcutaneously, s ince 1969.

[64] Men & women, civil and military personnel deployed for the purpose rushed with dedication whatever, from wherever and in whatever mode was possible under those conditions. At the initial stages, saving lives of the marooned, provision of essenti al food, safe drinking water were the obvious priorities; utensils and other voluntary services were trucked and airlifted as Medical professionals including the internees joined.

[65] Most people had no idea that weather takes no note of their belief systems . Disaster not only evoked and channelized public sympathy, at home & abroad, some major channels actively conducted awareness programs for private charity, collected and disbursed relief assistance, at times by enlisting feme -fatale celebrities of all hue a nd shade.

[66] Besides saving many precious lives, these agencies had done what was humanly possible, in view of the organizational & logistic constraints. That was, however, not so with respect to many in the Provincial Irrigation hierarchies. 72. Only WAPDA had had the opportunity to review its SOPs in the wake of Ataabad Lake syndrome to alert its senior professional team to explore and examine all options to meet any contingency, in the context of threats to Tarbela and downstream Chashma, should the Attab ad Lake burst by any chance.

[67] Like NDMA, the KP and the Punjab also acted with utmost dedication in conjunction with armed forces to minimize impact of the disaster, at times beyond the call of duty. These efforts need institutional back up. 73. As public perceptions, at home and abroad, compounded, including those from within the coalition partners, the Provincial Governments of Sindh and the Punjab constituted Judicial Commissions to probe into alleged acts of malfeasance or nonfeasance by the respective administrations.

[68] For obvious reasons, their ToRs were focussed to the specific complaints, rather than functionally and spatially integrated dimensions commensurate with scale of the national catastrophe, or redressal of publicly voiced complaints, in the ir entirety. This Commission benefited from the evidentiary material collected by the two Commissions with due regard to Ordinance II of 1969. 74.

[69] A comprehensive Disaster Risk Management plan is required to be developed by the NDMA. To do so it has to tak e an overview of many factors that impinges on this function under stressful conditions. According to an ADB paper ‘a disaster plan must incorporate measures to reduce exposure. A reliable system must contemplate reducing exposure, early warning and streng then resilience of the affectees before, during the onset of the calamity, and later in restoration stages .

[70] It also identified various elements including but not limited to : a) Acceleration of programs for infrastructure improvements to keep up with balloo ning urban population; to develop alternatives to those living in high -risk areas, protection and restoration of ecosystems that buffer the impact of natural 23 hazards ; b) ensuring timely warnings to reach individuals, to develop flexible systems ranging fr om global monitoring, regional, and national preparation to local emergency action; customize wording of warnings and methods used for local communities; to expand income options in rural areas, reducing reliance on a single crop; and c) encouraging region al cooperation that helps stricken economies to recover, protection and restoration of ecosystems that provide and enhance the livelihood of rural populations’ 75.

[71] On behalf of civil society, a case was made out for early restoration of LG systems; that wa s a legitimate suggestion but needs democratic realignment of its design to strengthen management structures for good governance; it is not to be a mutually exclusive system at the cost of good administration by colour blind rule.

[72] The 2001 LG system, put o n hold in all the Provinces, and not practiced in 44 cantonments administered under a 1924 Act and Islamabad managed under 1960 MA Ordinance, despite two elections in 2001 and 2005 and removal of reasons for not enforcing two Ordinances of 2002 need seriou s consideration too. 76.

[73] Before concluding, the Commission will like to flag its concerns about frequent efforts and attempts to tamper and meddle with tried and tested management and administrative structures of the country, and without any plans for up gradation of essential skills except investing in foreign demand -led areas.

[74] Controversial reform packages, at the behest of usurpers who engage ‘fly by night’ consultants with sole and premeditated task of perpetuation of their regimes and wrapped up with their exit from the scene need no more comments. There is no caveat that while changes in all man -made systems are necessary and must be subjected to periodical review, to do so without creating a viable alternate is most unwise.

[75] The moreso, as half baked attempts demoralized the key service institutions; e.g. those established by inter -provincial consensus of the founding fathers in December 1949 and sustained by successive constitutions, including 1973 decimated within a few days of commencement of the co nstitution and despite political accord of October 1972 on which it was founded.

[76] Disruption of appropriate training to align the service memberships with growing challenges of the time has taken its own toll. Like the bunds, not kept up as per the Bund Manual, these validly made constitutional institutions suffered erosion from the corroding influences of last 42 years of practices violative of basic law, and without remorse. 77.

[77] Last but not the least, extensive encroachments in the flood plain was flagg ed by most as one of the key factors responsible for obstructing the natural river flows, especially during the flood seasons. The Commission noted enormity of the dimensions of this practice during aerial view along the Indus River in two provinces in the form of vast lush green farms planted and interspersed throughout the reach of the Indus River bed where it flows on the ridge.

[78] During its hearings, two more issues were highlighted: Allotments of lands to Sindh “haris” in 24 Katcha area by a previous admini stration and growth of housing settlements to meet one of the most basic needs of shelter for growing population. (This is not unique to the River plains; mushroom growth of ‘Katchi abadis’ in Islamabad’s most developed urban centre and seat of Federal Gov ernment is not free from that malady. ) In the Commission’s view this is a symptom of policy failure, not a disease: successive governments have failed to develop and execute town planning as an integral and unavoidable instrument of state policy under whic h need oriented provision had to be made for meeting the residential requirements of the growing population rather than growth of affordability driven expansions .

[79] As a direct result thereof, leaving aside a few developers, this vital state function has bee n abdicated to real estate agents; the more organised and fortunate amongst the society resorted to housing cooperatives with DHAs in the lead; many proved inadequate in view of the sharp mismatch in supply of and demand for developed housing sites as well as emergence of opportunists and ‘qabza’ groups patronised under local influentials with all the attendant consequences.

[80] As ‘Kacthi abadi’ culture flourished as a ‘benign dispensation’ for most vulnerable exposed under the paradigm of ‘affordability’ and allowed to live under ‘hewers of wood and drawers of water’, as a shortcut having no other viable option; be it ad -hoc appointees in education and health sectors, frequently regularized sans due process mandated by articles 4 and 25; in irrigation sector, posting of personnel rendered surplus after abolition of posts/ departments, by absorbing against jobs inconsistent with their professional credentials did not raise any eyebrows.

[81] As enforcement lagged in every field, rule of law suffered and corruption mu ltiplied by the hour as an end product to haunt many, so much so that even laws protected under First schedule of the constitution for removal of illegal possessions of state properties and host of other laws listed earlier could not be invoked: routine co nversion of plots / estates in residential localities into commercial centres continue to compound the traffic congestion in urban centres besides creating extreme pressure on essential civic infrastructure of schools and hospitals.

[82] Recently the CDA has m anaged to secure thousands of Kanals of its land, worth tens of billions, from unauthorized occupants after the apex Court issued orders under Suo moto jurisdiction. The state needs to revisit its basic responsibilities too. 78. The largest damage to publ ic sector infrastructure was suffered by the Transport and Communication sector.

[83] Complaints of human interventions has also been voiced and the NHA was directed to apprise the Commission about such breaches in road network in various provinces and the esti mated losses; including the reasons for overtopping of M -I motorway.” The Urdu translation of the said concluding remarks is given below: - 25 26 27 28 29 30 5.

[84] In view of the above findings and concluding remarks , the Commission made the follo wing recommendations: - “RECOMMENDATIONS INTRODUCTION 79. As a result of its interaction with the representatives of various federal & provincial governments, ministries and institutions as well as the media, civil society organizations of the general pu blic, the Commission considers it appropriate to include a member of important recommendations in the Report. 80.

[85] Although the following recommendations are not directly in response to the formulations contained in the 15th December, 2010 Order of the Ho n’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan, these are nevertheless highly relevant to flood 31 control measures for preventing possible damage and devastation in the future.

[86] The Hon’ble Supreme Court may like to consider these submissions, for whatever action it deems n ecessary. I. EXPANSION OF FLOOD EARLY WARNING SYSTEMS (FEWS) 81. The current early warning facilities in the country are of a limited nature. According to Meteorology Department, the range of forecast is barely 3 -4 days.

[87] Due to limited technical capacit y, we are lagging far behind the developed countries. There are only 07 Radars in the whole country. There is no coverage in the northwest of the country and Balochistan, including the coastal belt of 960 km. 82. Although Pakistan is a member of the Word Meteorology Organization (WMO), it is not accessing information from it.

[88] Nor is it taking full advantage of information available with it. The Hon’ble Supreme Court may wish to advise the Government of Pakistan for taking the following measures at the ear liest: a. Expansion of radar coverage to the whole country. b. Establishing a coordinating mechanism with WMO and the SAARC countries for accessing / sharing information on early weather warning.

[89] II. FLOOD MITIGATION 83. During the devastating floods of 2010 which not only caused damage of life and property in the private sector but huge damage also occurred to the public sector infrastructure such as sweeping away of roads, bridges and a large number of schools, colleges and BHU’s etc. 84. In its inter action with public and private sector institutions, the Commission noted with concern that major damage occurred due to lack of maintenance and repair of river embankments, canals, and obstruction by major highways/motorways constructed by the Irrigation department and the National Highway Authority (NHA) and others across the country. 32 A.

[90] BARRAGES AND BUNDS 85. Several bunds, canals and barrages experienced breaches as a result. In the case of Jinnah Barrage, the breaching sections were identified befor e and were breached after proper consultative progress. The water discharged from such pre-designated breaches was channelized and it re -entered the Indus downstream.

[91] This was not so in the case of other bunds where no such provision existed and yet these bunds were allowed to be breached. This caused huge damage to life or property besides rendering thousands unemployed and homeless. 86. During its deliberations, the Commission observed that most damages could have been prevented if strategically locate d escape points, like the Raini Canal, were available at barrages, bunds and motorways/highways.

[92] Adequate systems could be put in place providing for a consultative plan for maintenance of bunds through assured funding, if necessary, by generating funds fr om water users as was offered by formers in KP. Provision for pre -designated breaches at barrages, bunds and motorways/highways could be provided after conducting a detail survey and preparing feasibility reports.

[93] B. MOTORWAYS/HIGHWAYS 87. It was brough t to the notice of the Commission by representatives of KP that the major reason for inundation of agricultural lands and abadis on the northern side of Peshawar -Islamabad Motorway (M1) was the inadequate capacity of crossing bridges meant for the drainage of flood flows in rivers located between Peshawar and Mardan.

[94] The motorway virtually acted like a “bund” obstructing the natural course of water flows in the area. The bed of river Kabul, upstream and downstream of the main Kabul river bridge, has silted up to an alarming level which has decreased the waterway and poses a serious threat of out -flanking and over-topping of this vitally important structure during floods.

[95] In fact, this happened during the flood of 2010 near the Jindi River which damaged the M 1 resulting in closure of the 33 motorway for several days. Similar concerns were voiced by representatives of civil society organizations and provinces. 88. It is imperative for the NHA and the FFC to carry out a joint survey and study of all its road netw ork in the country to identify areas of possible flooding as a result of obstruction caused by these roads and take remedial measures for provision of designated escape channels to ease the pressure of flood at various potential locations.

[96] The provincial highways and irrigation departments may also be associated. The Hon’ble Supreme Court may wish to advise the government to initiate actions, accordingly. III. ENCROACHMENTS 89. The 2010 Flood has fully exposed the illegal encroachments which have been al lowed to go unchecked by the concerned authorities due to negligence, corruption and poor managements resulting in massive losses to life and property. 90.

[97] Thousands of acres of “Katcha” lands have been illegally encroached upon by local influentials or have been leased out on nominal charges resulting in erection of private bunds. Construction of houses and other built up properties have been allowed along river banks and canals etc. Similarly, there has been a surge of encroachments on acquired lands in pond areas of barrages which has aggravated the flood hazards.

[98] The natural flow of water has been blocked as a result of numerous encroachments in most waterways due to unplanned and illegal constructions. 91. Unfortunately, the local and provincial gov ernments have themselves indulged in encouraging illegal acts promoting encroachments. Unauthorized and technically unsound public works have been executed by local authorities.

[99] Construction of roads and gas pipelines have been allowed to pass through bunds in contravention of legal provisions. All such encroachments have contributed to obstructions in the flow of water resulting in flooding of many areas. A matter of grave concern which came to the notice of the Commission was that some of the governments are selling acquired lands in pond 34 areas to raise revenues.

[100] Under the law, no construction of any infrastructure is allowed to be erected within a distance of 200 feet from banks of the rivers/streams. It should be a matter of serious concern if the govern ment itself indulges in unlawful acts of selling those very lands which it had acquired to protect irrigation infrastructure and property of the citizens. 92.

[101] The governments must correct that and ensure that no encroachments are permitted and no acqui red lands are sold or leased out. Actions should be initiated by governments to remove all encroachments with a firm hand. It should also ensure that all such illegally constructed structures on government lands which had been destroyed by the recent floods are not allowed to be re -erected. 93.

[102] The Hon’ble Supreme Court may wish to consider appropriate directions to the government in this regard. IV. MUNDA DAM 94. The proposed Munda Dam project, 6 km upstream of Munda Headworks, is in an advanced techn ical engineering stage. When constructed it would provide water storage of 1.3 MAF and produce 740 megawatts of power.

[103] More importantly, it would completely control the flows of water in Swat River and its tributaries which eventually flow into the Indus a t Khairabad, Attock district. Had Munda Dam been constructed, there would have been minimal damage downstream in Charsadda, Peshawar and Nowshera districts and Munda Headworks.

[104] The example of Gomal Zam Dam can be quoted here which is under construction and was responsible for preventing flooding of Dera Ismail Khan district even though it is partially complete. Keeping in view the great benefits of this Dam, the Hon’ble Supreme Court may consider advising the Federal Government to expedite execution of Mund a Dam and prioritize work on other potential sites to optimize gains from natural endowments.” The Urdu translation of the above said recommendations is as under: - 35 36 37 38 6.

[105] Besides the above findings and recommendations , the Commissio n, has noted following important impressions: - ‘Pakistan’s current water storage capacity is limited to 10 -15% of annual availability, rest flows to the Arabian Sea. With additional storage, the Nature’s free bounty will not only add cheapest electricity a nd feed up to 500 million people’: Muhammad Shakil Durrani, Chairman WAPDA .

[106] In 2006 -2007, the NDMA was established under an inter - Provincial Commission headed by the Prime Minister ‘to regulate the national disaster management system to overcome unforesee n situations’ through a network of PDMAs & DDMAs: Presidential Ordinances (XL of 2006, XV & LIII of 2007), enacted in December 2010 as Act XXIV of 2010.

[107] Besides 1,600 deaths, the 2010 Flood inflicted an estimated loss of Rs.855 billion of which 65% was on private account; 4.5 million lost jobs, mostly in farm sector besides Rabi crops for 2010-11, unprecedented 20 million people were rendered IDPS and 7.0 million students were deprived of ½ of their academic session: Official Reports. ‘In all, 1,296 rescu e and relief flights were handled by the PAF out of which 767 flights were operated from the Shahbaz Airbase, in jacobabad, alonge’: Mr.

[108] Rab Nawaz, Secretary, the Punjab I & P Department. ‘….LGB/LMB [of Jinnah Barrage] had already eroded (on 29 July) due t o ‘pathetic handling of barrage gates’ by the XEN Incharge of the regulation who apparently left it to the lower staff to decide,and forge the record later’: Mr. Rab Nawaz, Secretary, the Punjab I & P Department. 39 … ‘relevant staff of the Irrigation Departm ent is well trained and capable of dealing with any flood like situation’.

[109] Sindh government’s official statement in the NDMA meeting held on 28th June 2010, at Islamabad. ‘…most bunds, including Tori Bund, had lost almost 70 inches or so of their designed heights that contemplated six feet freeboard over 1976 HF Line with additional margin of 1 -2 feet’: Statement by Mr. Zafarullah Mehr, Former Chief engineer, Guddu Barrage, on behalf of the Sindh Government. ‘….the sudden build -up at Tarbela and Mangla du ring next 2 -3 days, took every one by surprise…it came down in a relatively shorter period…..As a consequence, the Troi and MC Bunds overtopped by excessive flows’.

[110] Statement by Mr. Shuja Junejo, Former Secretary I & P Sindh, ex -officio Vice Chairman, The IRC and Editor Revised Sindh Bund Manual. ‘….no bund was overtopped’: The Draft Flood Rehabilitation Plan, 2010, Planning Commission, dated 15 December, 2010. … that due to heavy downpour during the flood season, deep garrahs occurred which were filled b y scraping the top of the bund so that a adequate freeboard was found deficient and water tear had weakened the bund:’ Record of IRC meeting dated 14 October 2010 (Agenda Item no.85, at page 59). ‘Sindh TV’ ……cameramen were the first to capture the illegal breach of Tori Bund, much before arrival of the high floods’ :Statement by Mr.

[111] Javed Ahmed Soomro, Reporter “Sindh TV”. ‘Sindh administration was negligent as it did not take appropriate measures, though the flood waters from Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) too k almost 3 weeks to reach Kotri’: Sh. Nisar Hussain, Bureau Chief of ‘Apna TV’. 40 7. Amongst them, one of the most important impressions is mentioned on the top of the list.

[112] This statement has been made by a person not less than the status of Chairman W APDA, denial whereof apparently is not possible, unless rebutted by any other cogent version. How a country like Pakistan, whose economy mainly depends on agricultural growth, can afford th at its 85 -90% of water flows in to the Arabian Sea, thus goes waste, surely due to non effective administrative plans including increasing the current water storage capacity, which is not only the cheapest source of generation of electricity thereby adding the resources for the welfare of the citizens.

[113] The Commission in its recommendations has emphasized on the need of completion of construction of Munda Dam . The Federal Government is directed to look into this aspect of the matter seriously. 8. The Inquiry Commission has documented in a comprehensive manner the reasons of unprecedented flood of 2010.

[114] No doubt it was a nat ural calamity , essentially beyond the limits and resources of Federal and Provincial Governments to control the same . As far as extend ing the relief to the victims is concerned , no stone was left unturned to reach out to them, for which the credit goes to the respective governments, but at the same time had there been a comprehensive management plan to control the same before time by strengthening the embankments ( Bands) by the Provincial Governments , parti cularly encroachment in the river banks on account of which the flow of water was blocked, as it has been pointed out hereinabove , or strengthen the embankments and at the same time ensuring maintenance of same from engineering point of view on annual basi s, there was every probability of reducing the quantum of losses, which according to the findings recorded on formulation No.6 comes to Rs. 855 billion , out of which 65% was suffered by private persons, excluding complete loss of one additional Rabi Crop i n Jaffarabad District of Naseerabad Division in Balochistan etc. 9.

[115] Admittedly , post flood scenario had also not reduced the miseries of the people of Balochistan and Sindh. Inasmuch as, during the inquiry proce edings by the Commission , it had to send an interim report, in pursuance where of directions were issued by this Court vide 41 order dated 28.03.2011 to the Chief Secretaries of the provinces of Balochistan and Sindh to pool their all resources and ensure without fail to complete the task of supply of w ater to the farmers in Dera Allah Yar and adjacent areas of province of Sindh so that the farmers/poor affectees may prepare their lands for cultivation of Kharif crop.

[116] Compliance report was received from the Chief Secretar y Balochistan where in it was stat ed that I&P Department, Government of Balochistan would ensure the supply of sufficient irrigation water for Kharif season during 3rd week of May, 2011. 10. It seems that Federal and Provincial Governments had shown interest to extend immediate relief to the flood victims during the time when it was on its peak but subsequent thereto except disbursing an amount of Rs.20,000/ - to each family for re -building or repair of houses on 50 -50% basis (by the Federal and Provincial Governments) the disbursement of r emaining amount has not been commenced so far.

[117] The victim s, who suffered enormous losses , as is evident from the findings of the Commission , attached their expectations from the executive (Federal and Provincial Governments) , and rightly so , as under Artic le 9 of the Constitution no person shall be deprived of lif e or liberty save in accordance with law.

[118] Therefore, it is duty of the government to protect their lives and properties and also decrease their miseries, which they have suffered during the flood 2010. Needless to observe that due to flood devastation , the rights of the affectees/victims g uaranteed by Article 14 of the Constitution which speaks about inviolability of dignity of a man have also been violated .

[119] The pictures placed on record along with report by the Commission speak that how the ir dignity , etc. was compromised. This Court has interpreted the expression “life” being keyword in Article 9 in a number of judgments including the case of Shehla Zia v. WAPDA (PLD 1994 SC 693 ); therefore, elabo rate/detailed discussion on this aspect of the case is not necessary because though on account of the natural disaster the citizen s in all the four provinces suffered dreadfully due to which neither their lives nor the property were safe but at the same ti me the executive s could not be excluded from their liabilities to exten d the fundamental right of life and liberty to them, for the reasons mentioned in the findings as well as recommendations of the commission , therefore, Government is directed to ensure payment of 42 balance of remaining amount, which is approximately Rs.80000/ - per family as early as possible . 11.

[120] In this context reference of encroachment in the chapter of recommendations which has already been reproduced hereinabove, may be made. It conta ins statement of facts because the illegal encroachment s have been allowed to go unchecked by the concerned authorities due to negligence, corruption and poor management resulting in massive losses to life and property .

[121] It further adds that thousands of ac res of “Kachha ” lands have illegally been encroached upon by local influential persons or ha ve been leased out on meager charges result ing in erection of private bu nds. Construction of house and other built-up propert ies have been allowed along with river banks and canals, etc.

[122] Similarly, there has been a surge of encroachments on acquired land in pond area of barrages which aggravates the flood hazards. The nat ural flow of water has been blocked as a result of enormous encroachment s in most water ways due t o unplanned and illegal construction s. The findings of the Commission need no further proof, therefore, the concerned Provincial Governments through their Chief Secretaries, should immediately remove the same ; even if need be, by adopting coercive measures through the law enforcing agencies, otherwise responsibility of any loss to life and pr operty of the victim shall rest upon their shoulders with all its consequences. 12.

[123] It is pertinent to mention here that h ow a poor farmer can have the courage to cha llenge the encroacher s or violators of the Constitution and the law, i n our society based on the feudal syste m like in Balochistan and Sindh, however , judicial notice of the same can conveniently be taken. Inasmuch as , such like members of community had no awareness about their rights and obligations, therefore, it become s the duty of this Court to enforce their fundamental rights considering the same to be of public importance.

[124] Otherwise , the powerful and influential persons, with collaboration of the exec utive, will continue to deny the m such rights without realizing that it is the liability of the State towards every citizen. Similarly , obedience to the Constitution and law is inviolable obligation o f every citizen wherever he may be and of every other person for the time being within Pakistan.

[125] Denial of fundamental ri ghts to down trodden class has 43 become common phenomenon , therefore, the officers representing the respective governments are bound to fulfill their commitments under the Constitution by protec ting the fundamental right of such like persons as it has been held in Syed Masroor Ahsan v.

[126] Ardeshir Cowasjee (PLD 1998 SC 823 ), Sardar Farooq Ahmed Leghari v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1999 SC 57 ). 13. It is to be noted that in India as well as in Pa kistan the Public Interest Litigation (PIL) was resorted to due to denial of enforcement of fundamental rights to the persons who fall in the category of non -resourceful at the hands of resourceful.

[127] Thus, at this stage refer ence may be made to the case of Behar Legal Support Society v. Chief Justice of India (AIR 1986 SC 38) = [(1986) 4 SCC 767] wherein Justice Bhag wati the great jurist opined as follows: - “The weaker sections of Indian humanity have been deprived of justice for long years; they had no acce ss to justice on account of their poverty, ignorance and illiteracy.

[128] They are not aware of the rights and benefits conferred upon them by the constitution and the law. On account of their socially and economically disadvantaged position they lack the capac ity to assert their rights, and they do not have the material resources with which to enforce their social and economic entitlements and combat exploitation and injustice.” Scope of the public Interest litigation has been explained by Justice Bhagwati in the case of State of H imachal P radesh v.

[129] Student’s Parent Medical College Simla (AIR 1985 SC 910) = [(1985) 3 SCC 169], which reads as under: - “Where the Court finds, on being moved by an aggrieved party or by any public spirited individual or social acti on group, that the executive is remiss in discharging its obligations under the Constitution or the law, so that the poor and the under privileged continue to be subjected to exploitation and injustice or are deprived of their social and economic entitleme nts or that social legislation enacted for their benefit is not being implemented thus depriving them of the rights and benefits conferred upon them, the Court certainly can and must 684 intervene and compel the Executive to carry out its constitutional an d legal obligations and ensure that the deprived and vulnerable sections of the community are no longer subjected to exploitation or injustice and they are able to realise their social and economic rights.

[130] When the Court passes any orders in public interes t litigation, the Court does so not with a view to mocking at legislative or executive authority or in a spirit of confrontation but with a view to enforcing the Constitution and the law, because it is vital for the maintenance of the rule of law that the obligations which are laid upon the executive by the Constitution and the law should be carried out 44 faithfully and no one should go away with a feeling that the constitution and the law are meant only for the benefit of a fortunate few and have no meaning for the large numbers of half-clad, half -hungry people of this country”. 14.

[131] In the instant case as well , no one amongst the sufferer had approached this Court although their miseries are quite evident from the contents of the report but admiration goes to the petitioners out of whom one is Member of Parliament (Ms. Marvi Memon ) who filed petition under Article 184(3) , whereas , Mr.

[132] Jan Muhammad Jamali, Deputy Chairman , Senate , Mr. Fakhruddin G. Ebrahim, Sr. ASC (Jurist ) and so many others have invoked the jurisdiction of this Court for the enforcement of fundamental rights of general public of their respective areas . To our understanding the manner in which they cooperated with the Commission could not be else e xcept that they had felt atrocities of farmer s, etc. who had suffered and sustained huge losses as noted in the report, therefore, while entertaining these matters this Court is well aware of its constitutional obligation , namely , to ensure enforcement of the fundamental rights of victims and providi ng relief to them, and secondly , relief should be provided to those who suffered this calamity which was b eyond our imagination, thus, we hope that this report will assist the Federal and Provincial Government s in evaluating their losses , as fairly as poss ible. 15.

[133] The Inquiry Commission had compiled the report after having considered minute details and comprehensively recorded findings on all the formulation, which has arisen out of the pleadings of the parties , therefore, representing to all those suffe rers whose life and property was not protected for the reasons mentioned hereinabove as well as in the report, which also includes criminal negligence on the part of officers/officials of the Irrigation Department of the respective government s in not maint aining the embankments (bands), etc. and failing to cause the breach of the same on specific places .

[134] Like the Ali Wahn Beraj was not breached at the specific places as a result whereof water had over topped and entered into Tehsil Allah Yar of District Nas eer Abad , causing tremendous loss. It is not difficult to understand that what was the purpose of not breaching the Beraj from the specific place; obviously, to provide protection to some of the persons who had got vested interest s.

[135] Had the Irrigation 45 Department fulfilled its duties as per the Irrigation Code, the flow of water towards Tehsil Dera Allah Yar could have been avoided. Be that as it may , as large number of victims in all the provinces are waiting for the findings recorded by the Inquiry Commiss ion and the judgment on the same by this Court , therefore , it is important to note that such findings of the Inquiry Commission are to be implemented by the Federal and Provincial Governments following the codal formalities like registration of the case s of corruption , corrupt practices against the delinquents . 16.

[136] With a view to disseminate the contents of the report in recognition of the fundamental rights of the citizens under Article 19 -A of the Constitution, findings, concluding remarks and recommend ations , simultaneously have been reproduced hereinabov e in English and Urdu languages . 17. As a result of above discussion, t he findings, concluding remarks and recommendations are endorsed, accepted and hereby made part of this judgment with declaration that it will have binding effect on all concerned and sundry. 18.

[137] Thus, accordingly following directions are issued: - (i) The Federal and Provincial Government s through Secretary Cabinet and Secretary Interior Division as well as Chief Secretaries of all t he Provinces are hereby directed to implement the findings and recommendations of the report in letter and spirit. (ii) The report so prepared by the Commission shall be supplied, both sof t and hard copies , to all concerned immediately. (iii) The Secretary Informatio n of Federal and Provincial Governments are hereby directed to ensure publications of the findings and recommendations of the Commission and the instant order widely in print media as well as in electronic media in all the provinces and Islamabad Capital T erritory in national and local languages. 46 (iv) The compliance report for our perusal in Chambers shall be sent fortnightly by the Chief Secretaries. 19.

[138] Before parting with the judgment , we would like to express our gratitude to the Flood Inquiry Commission in producing their report in compliance with our order of 15th December, 201 0 passed in these petitions brought before us, in the wake of the sufferings of persons who had to endure due to the floods swallowing up major parts of this country, damaging prec ious lives and valuable property .

[139] We would like to thank the Chairman of the Flood Inquiry Commission, Mr. Muhammad Azam Khan for chairing this Commission whose unfettered commitment made this report to see the light of the day , reflecting the colossal dam age suffered by this nation. We would also like to thank the other three members of the Commission, including M/s Fateh Khan Khajjak, A .W.

[140] Kazi and Kh. Zaheer Ahmed for their determination and perseverance towards the completion of this task with their adm inistrative skills, professionalism, commitment, devotion and dedication in not only unearthing the facts and circumstances surrounding this disaster suffered by the victims but also following the constitutional command that life and property of the citize n must be protected by the executive.

[141] We would further like to acknowledge the backing provided by the Federal Government as well as the Provincial Governments by complying with the order s of this Court and assisting in the m aking of this report. We would also like to thank the Secretary Cabinet Division, Ms. Nargis Sethi for providing her assistance and collaboration in successfully composing this report.

[142] We must acknow ledge the support provided by Mr. Sajid Mehmood Qazi , Additional Registrar of this Cour t/ facilitator of the Commission and his staff by assisting the inquiry Commission in accomplishing their task without any hindrance and providing them with all the necessary help required. We also acknowledge and appreciate gestures shown by the petition ers by invoking jurisdiction for the enforcement of the fundamental rights having public importan ce as discussed hereinabove.

[143] We feel that media persons had equally played effective role to unearth the sufferings of the victims of flood , 2010 , therefore, we appreciate their efforts in this behalf as well. 47 20. For the foregoing reasons petitions are accordingly accepted. Chief Justice Judge Judge Islamabad,the 7th June, 2011 Nisar/* Approved For Reporting