Case No: C.P.L.A.183-Q/2023
Case Title: Govt. of Balochistan thr. its secy. Forest and Wildlife Dept., Quetta & Another v. Ghulam Rasool
Subject: Service/Against Reinstatment into Service
Judge: Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar
Judgment Date: 15-04-2024
Upload Date: 02-05-2024
Citations: 2024 SCMR 1155
SC Citations: 2024 SCP 146
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._183_q_2023.pdf

[1] judgment dated 03.05.2023 passed by Balochistan Service Tribunal, Quetta in S.As. No.475, 524, 564, 569, 570, 582,  , 101, , 96 -,  Govt. of Balochistan thr. its secy. Forest and Wildlife Dept., Quetta & Another …Petitioner s Versus Ghulam Rasool Muhammad Aslam Habib -ur-Rehman Akhtar Shah Tawab Khan Talha Shah & Others Abdul Jabbar Lehri & Another Abdul Raziq Najam -ud-din Ejaz Ahmed Hafeezullah Muhammad Riaz Saddam Hussain (CP 183 -Q/23) (CP 184 -Q/23) (CP 185 -Q/23) (CP 186 -Q/23) (CP 187 -Q/23) (CP 188 -Q/23) (CP 189 -Q/23) (CP 190 -Q/23) (CP 191 -Q/23) (CP 192 -Q/23) (CP 193 -Q/23) (CP 194 -Q/23) (CP 195 -Q/23) …Respondents For the Petitioner s: Mr.

[2] M. Ayaz Khan Swati, Addl. AG Balochistan For the Respondents : N.R. Date of Hearing: 15.04.2024 Judgment Muhammad Ali Mazhar , J. These Civil Petitions for leave to appeal are directed against the judgment dated 03.05.2023 , passed by the Balochistan Service Tribunal, Quetta , in Service Appeal s No. 475, 524, 564, 569, 570, 582 ,  , 101, , 96 - and . 2.

[3] The respondents in their service appeals before the Service Tribunal pleaded that they were appointed after due process and fulfillment of CPs 183 -Q/23 etc. 2 all codal formalities . They submitted their applications for jobs in response to the advertisement published in the newspapers; they appeared in the test and interview, were declared successful , and after joining such a competitive process , were selected by the Departmental Recruitment Committee .

[4] As a result thereof , offer letters were issued to them and they joined their duties ; but just after twenty days, their appointment letters were withdrawn without the issuing of any show cause notice and without providing any opportunity of hearing. 3. The l earned Additiona l Advocate General , Balochistan (A.A.G.) argued that the respondents were appointed without adopting the laid down mandatory procedure for making appointments but that the appointments were made on political influence and since the appointments were illega l, therefore the competent authority rightly cancelled/withdrew their appointments .

[5] He further argued that the appeals before the Service Tribunal were time barred. It was further contended that the competent authority constituted an Inquiry Board for the purpose of inquiry in accordance with the Section 9 and 10 of the Balochistan Employee Efficiency and Discipline Act , 2011 , and initiated departmental proceedings soon after realizing the factual position.

[6] It was further contended that the Service Tribunal was itself not clear on how many respondents were in possession of fake appointment orders. 4. Heard the arguments. It is clearly demonstrating that the recruitment process was not initiated and completed in the spur of the moment but was conducted in di fferent phases and segments.

[7] The recruitment process was initiated pursuant to the Finance Department , Schedule of New Expenditure 2012 -13, Budget Book Volume -VIII. The Government of Balochistan , vide Notification dated 31.08.2012 , accorded administrative approval for the creation of posts in the Forest and Wildlife Department.

[8] The advertisements were published in vernacular newspapers for inviting application s of interested persons for jobs. The respondents applied for different vacant posts ranging from BPS-1 to BPS -15. The Government of Balochistan, vide Notification dated 01.09.2016, constituted a Departmental Recruitment Committee .

[9] After conducting written test and interviews, the Departmental Recruitment Committee recommended the respondents for appoin tments against the vacant posts . The respondents joined their duties according to the postings CPs 183 -Q/23 etc. 3 and their S ervice Books were also prepared , but out of the blue, t heir appointment orders were withdrawn/cancelled . 5.

[10] The minutes of the meeting of the Departm ental Recruitment Committee expounds the quorum of committee , compr ising the Chief Conservat or of Forest as Chairman , while four other members were representing the Services & General Administration Department, Finance Department, Forest and Wildlife Depar tment , and Deputy Conservator of Forest, Government of Balochista n.

[11] The l earned A.A.G. admitted that the Departmental Recruitment Committee was constituted under the Balochistan Civil Servants ( Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules , 2009 . When we conf ronted him on whether any action was taken against the responsible persons who allegedly floated the recruitment process without approval, the learned A.A.G. argued that some disciplinary action was taken against the Chief Conservator of Forest .

[12] It is not comprehensible that it was a one - man show ; rather, other committee members , including all other persons involved or engaged in receiving job applications, allow ing respondents to sit in the written test s and interviews , issuing appointment letters, allowin g joining and postings, preparing the service books , and communicating the names to the Accounts/ Finance departments for incorporation in the payroll , must have been involved in the process .

[13] However, the learned A.A.G neither apprised us if any action was taken against them nor placed any lawful justification as to why others were exonerated if the recruitment process was allegedly a sham. 6. The record articulates that the drastic action of withdrawing appointments letters and terminating service was car ried out without issuing any show cause notice and without affording any opportunity of hearing to the terminated employees.

[14] The philosophy of natural justice is meant for affording a right of audience before any detrimental action is taken by any quasi -judicial authority, statutory body , or any departmental authority regulated under some law. The right to a fair trial is a fundamental right , while the vested right , by and large , is a right that is unqualifiedly secured and does not rest on any particular e vent or set of circumstances.

[15] The doctrine of locus poenitentiae sheds light on the power of receding till a decisive step is taken , but it is not a principle of law that an order once passed becomes irrevocable and a past and closed CPs 183 -Q/23 etc. 4 transaction. Indubitab ly, if the order is found illegal , no perpetual right can be claimed on the basis of such an illegal order , but in this case, nothing was articulated to allege that the respondents by hook and crook managed their appointments or committed any misrepresenta tion or fraud or they were not eligible for the posts on which their appoint ment was recommended by the Departmental Recruitment Committee of five members where each case was considered diligently , and after a burdensome exercise, the names were recommende d by the Departmental Recruitment Committee .

[16] Therefore, it cannot be construed that the respondents were appointed without fulfilling the codal formalities . Rather, on their appointment s with due process, some vested rights have been created in their favou r which could not have been withdrawn in a perfunctory manner . 7. What can a desperate job seeker do? At best, he can apply for the job in response to the advert isements of vacant posts, submit his credentials according to the job requirements , and join the competitive process through written test s and interview s, then wait for the result and final call.

[17] It is not in his dominion to conduct due diligence , before making a formal application , on whether the recruitment process by means of advertisement in t he newspaper for vacant situations is issued by the competent authority or not. The record reflects that the advertisement was published on 30. 07.2016, the last date of submission of the application was 22. 08.2016, the date of test/interviews was fixed on 19th & 20th September , 2016 , and the applicants were again informed through a notice published in the newspaper on 27. 08.2016 , and a meeting of the Departmental Recruitment Committee was convened on 29. 08.2016.

[18] In the case at hand, if the process was alleg edly initiated wrongly, then why were the concerned government departments under a deep slumber or ignorance? W hy, at very initial stage, was the entire recruitment process not scraped? W hy was the Departmental Recruitment Committee constituted? W hy were appointment orders issued with postings ? And why were service books made? All of these questions are shrouded in a mystery and no logical justification was pleaded as to why the entire recruitment process was undone suddenly. 8.

[19] As an u ltimate fact -findin g forum, the learned Service Tribunal has already dealt with all the relevant features of the case and also relied CPs 183 -Q/23 etc. 5 on a judgment of this Court reported as Inspector General of Police, Quetta and another vs Fida Muhammad and others (2022 SCMR 1583) in which a somewhat similar bone of contention was dealt with and the ratio of the judgment is quite applicable in this case.

[20] We have also noted that in paragraph 19 of the impugned judgment, the learned Tribunal , while allowing appeals of the respondents, fairly articulated that the department should not compromise on the requisite academic qualifications , and all academic certificates, testimonials, domicile s, CNIC s etc. were directed to be verified from the concerned institutions/departments before activation of salaries and payment of back benefits and in tandem, the department was also allowed to hold an inquiry to ascertain whether the respondents were gainfully employed or not during the intervening period. 9.

[21] The l earned A.A.G. could not point out any ille gality or infirmity in the impug ned judgment calling for any interference , therefore, l eave is declined and aforesaid civil petitions are dismissed. Judge Judge Judge ISLAMABAD 15th April, 2024 Mudassar / “Approved for reporting”