Case No: C.P.L.A.2117/2016
Case Title: Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority thr.its Chairman v. Independent Media Corporation (Pvt)Ltd.thr.its Attorney
Subject: Miscelleneous
Judge: MR. JUSTICE DOST MUHAMMAD KHAN
Judgment Date: 04-07-2016
Upload Date: 09-07-2016
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2016 SCP 100
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/C.P._2117_2016.pdf

[1] judgment dated 28.6.2016 passed by the High Court of Sindh at Karachi in M.A. No.) Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority ….Petitioner VERSUS Independent Media Corporation, Limited ….Respondents For the petitioner: Mr. Kashif Hanif, ASC Mr. Mehr Khan Malik, AOR (absent) Mr. Absar Alam, Chairman, PEMRA For the respondent: Mr.

[2] Jam Asif Mehmood Lar, ASC Mr. Qutab -ud-Din Saim Hashmi, ASC Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR For Respondents 1 -3: Mr. Omair Syed Head (Litigation) Date of hearing: 4.7.2016 ORDER Dost Muhammad Khan, J. — At the very outs et, the learned counsel for the parties agreed that let the main CPLA be decided in the following terms: - (i) That so far as the suspension of the show/program for three days by PEMRA is concerned, due to injunction order of the learned High Court of Sindh a v ery narrow margin of time is left and because the matter is listed for hearing today before the said Court , hence to that extent the petition has almost become infructuous . (ii) The rest of the four charges are still alive and to be inquired into/investigated by the COC and after receiving the recommendations the PEMRA (competent authority) would look into it while complying with all the rules and provisions of law CP  2 on the subject and will also consider the effect of the apology to be tendered publically by the Channel and through print media. 2.

[3] During course of hearing, it came to our notice that many other channels, like the one under consideration, have not installed the censoring devices, particularly time delaying mechanism to cut off and expunge the off ending part of the live show /program and bring it in conformity with the PEMRA rules and provisions of the Ordinance. 3.

[4] It was stated at the bar that a team of experts would soon inspect all the channels to ensure that such device i.e. time delaying mechanism is in place so that undesirable and offending programs or spoken wor ds are not aired and the same are blocked. 4. As the rest of the four allegations/charges fall within the domain of PEMRA, therefore, it may proceed with the same according to the law and rules on the subject and to conclude the m atter as was agreed at the bar within 30 days, which shall commence after Eid holidays.

[5] Needless to remark that the respondent may submit reply within 10 days, after Eid vacations. 5. In view of the se arrangements , the appeal filed by the respondent before the High Court of Sindh has become infructuous and may be disposed of accordingly. Petition is converted into appeal and disposed of.