Case No: C.P.L.A.47/2024
Case Title: Muhammad Ayaz and others v. Mst. Saima Saeed and others
Subject: Suit for Declaration/Mandatory Injunction
Judge: Mr. Justice Shahid Waheed
Judgment Date: 11-09-2024
Upload Date: 14-09-2024
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2024 SCP 310
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._47_2024.pdf

[1] ORDER In a suit for declaration and Shahid Waheed, J: injunction, the plaintiffs (petitioners herein) applied for a Saima Saeed, as their witness. The Trial Judge declined the application, and his order was first upheld by the Appellate Court and then by the Revision Court. It is these orders that have given rise to this petition under Article 185(3) of the Constitution.

[2] The Courts' refusal is supported by the 2. observations of the Privy Council in Kishori Lal v. Chunni Lal (31 All. 116 at page 122). Their Lordships of the Privy Council have referred to the practice, which sometimes seemed to obtain in some Courts of calling the party ’s opponent as a witness. They have observed /Muhammad Ayaz and others VersusBench-lII Mr.

[3] Justice Yahya Afridi Mr. Justice Shahid Waheed Mr. Justice Aqeel Ahmed AbbasiSUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN (Appellate Jurisdiction) CPLA No.47 of 2024 (Against the judgment datedlS. 12.20^3 of the Peshawar High Court, Peshawar, passed in Civil Revision No.235-P of 2022. summons to be issued to the first defendant, Mst.

[4] C.P.L,A. 2 that this practice is highly objectionable. practice," said their Lordships, permitted in the result embarrass judicial to investigation. ” In another case titled Mahunt Shatrugan Das V. Bawa Sham Das and others (AIR 1938 PC 59), the Privy Council reiterated that the practice of calling the defendant as a witness to give evidence on behalf of the plaintiff is condemnable.

[5] Based on the precedents cited above, we may 3. say that it is a bad practice for parties to refrain from entering the witness box when they are in a position to give personal evidence. Therefore, the first defendant in the suit, giving rise to this petition, is expected to provide personal testimony in support of her case.

[6] If she does not appear without sufficient cause, it will amount to suppression Court will be entitled to draw an inference against her. Be it noted that, in the facts of the present 4. case, if the first defendant fails to appear in the witness box, allowing the plaintiffs to compel her presence by objectionable.

[7] Such a practice places the examination and cross-examination of a witness in the wrong hands. 5"ought never to be or withholding of evidence, and the hinders fair trial, and obstructs justice."Such a the issue of a witness summons would still be t C.P.L.A. 3 5. That seems to be the effect of the orders made by the Courts below.

[8] As a result, we do not find infirmity in the orders and are poised to uphold them. dismissed, and leave is 6. This petition is accordingly refused. Islamabad 11.09.2024 APPROVED FOR REPORTING