Case No: C.P.39/2011
Case Title: Ch. Nasir Iqbal and others v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary Law and others
Subject: U/A 184
Judge: Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry
Judgment Date: 29-04-2013
Upload Date: 02-09-2013
Citations: PLD 2014 SC 72
SC Citations: 2013 SCP 117
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/const.p.39_90_2011.pdf

[1] ORDER These petitions have been filed inter alia by the Overseas Citizens of Pakistan and Imran Khan, Chairm an, Pakistan Tehrik -e- Const. P No.39 & 90 -2011 2 Insaf ( In Constitution Petition No.90 of 2011), wherein relief has been claimed to the following effect :- “In view of the above circumstances and facts, it is humbly prayed that this Hon ’ble Court may kindly be pleased to issue appr opriate direction to the Respondents to make arrangements enabling the overseas Pakistanis as well to exercise their right of franchise as per mandate of the Constitution of Pakistan by preparing and updating electoral rolls and devising provisions for mak ing it possible for Overseas Pakistanis to caste their votes in the forthcoming elections within the framework and scheme of the Constitution of Pakistan.

[2] It is further prayed that Respondents may kindly be directed to make appropriate measures for making it possible for the Overseas Pakistanis to cast their vote in Pakistan consulates and embassies like many other developed/developing countries do so. Any other relief deemed appropriate under the circumstances of the case may also be granted.” 2.

[3] A similar relief has also been claimed by Ch. Nasir Iqbal and others (I n Constitution Petition No.3 9 of 2011 ), which is reproduced herein below. “It is therefore most humbly prayed that the instant petition may kindly be accepted and respondents be directed to take all those steps which are necessary for implementation of the fundamental right of vote to all overseas Pakistanis including arrangements in Consulate and Embassies of Pakistan all over the world before the next General Election for National and Pr ovincial Assemblies and an opportunity be Const.

[4] P No.39 & 90 -2011 3 provided to overseas Pakistanis of casting their votes.” 3. During hearing of the petition s from time to time in presence of the learned counsel for the parties except making different suggestions for making arra ngement s to evolve a mechanism so that the Overseas Citizens of Pakistan may exercise their right of franchise , no concrete progress was made . 4.

[5] In the circumstances, we ha d to issue notice to the learned Attorney General for Pakistan to assist the Cour t. Mr. Irfan Qadir, learned Attorney General has appeared and stated that his predecessor Molvi Anwar -ul-Haq, former Attorney General for Pakistan had made a statement during hearing of these petitions that an appropriate legislation would need to be ado pted by the Parliament enabling the Overseas Citizens of Pakistan to exercise their right of vote during the general or by -elections in the country , therefore , now he would take up the matter with the high-ups to make progress before the forthcoming electi ons. 5.

[6] We may point out that during the previous hearing s, an impression was also given to us that the Cabinet is taking necessary steps to promulgat e the law on the subject . When the case w as taken up, Mr. Nadeem Ashraf, Secretary, Government of Pakist an, Ministry of Overseas Pakistan is¸ who was present in the Court in connection with hearing of some other case, entered appearance and Const.

[7] P No.39 & 90 -2011 4 stated that Ministry of Overseas Pakistanis has already proposed legislation on this subject but so far no further progress has been made. 6. Mr. Hamid Khan, learned counsel state d that in the neighbouring count ry by means of subordinate legislation i.e. The Registration of Electors Rules, 1960 , the Electors , who are residing outside India had been registered as voter s and according to him in different countries , different modes have been adopted to afford an opportunity to their Overseas Citizens to cast their votes in the election which includes arrangement for the polling , by extending such facilities at the Diplomati c Missions for Personal Voting, Postal Ballots , Proxy Voting , Electronic Voting or Fax Voting . 7.

[8] Mr. Muhammad Munir Paracha, learned counsel for the Election Commission of Pakistan stated that according to the database provided by the NADRA on the basi s of NICOP Cards, Pakistan Origin Cards and Identity Cards, 4 million Overseas Pakistanis have been registered. The Secretary, M/o Overseas Pakistanis pointed out that according to the data available with the said Ministry, there are 7.5 million Overseas P akistanis and according to the information of the said Ministry , 5.2 million Overseas Citizens of Pakistan have been registered by the NADRA and NICOP Cards have been issued to them.

[9] On having heard all the parties, we are of the opinion that:- Const. P No.39 & 90 -2011 5 (1) The Electio n Commission of Pakistan must ensure that all the Overseas Citizens of Pakistan , who are qualified/eligible for the registration of their votes in accordance with t he Electoral Rolls Act, 1974 and the Rules framed there under must be registered as early as possible before the forth coming elections. (2) The NADRA and the Ministry of Overseas Pakistanis may cooperate with the Election Commission of Pakistan for registration of Overseas Citizens of Pakistan as voter s and if need be NADRA may also issue t o eligible Overseas Citizens of Pakistan , NICOP Cards, as completing this exercise would be helpful in registering their names as voters , if their name s have not been entered in the Electoral Lists so far .

[10] The Ministries of Law and Overseas Pakistanis as well as the Election Commission of Pakistan may convene a meeting to adopt a mechanism either by adopting an Electronic Voting System for which perhaps no legislation may be required . The p ossibility should also be explored for declaring Pakistani Diploma tic Missions (Embassies and Consulates, etc) as Polling Stations by the Election Commission of Pakistan where requisite information and data regarding Electoral Lists and Constituency -wise candidates could be made available electronically by the Election C ommission of Pakistan, NADRA and M/o Overseas Pakistanis and after due identification and authentication of Overseas Const.

[11] P No.39 & 90 -2011 6 Citizens of Pakistan may be provided the facility to cast their votes either electronically or through a ballot paper issued at such Diplom atic Mission so that they can exercise their Constitutional right of franchise. The ballot papers cast at the Diplomatic Mission could be placed in a sealed envelope and thereafter sent to the Election Commission of Pakistan for the purpose of onward trans mission to the respective Returning Officer/Presiding Officer of the relevant Constituency, which can be noted on the said envelope containing the ballot papers. (3) Similarly, the Election Commission of Pakistan , as per the direction s of this Court in t he case of Worker’s Party Pakistan v.

[12] Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2012 SC 681) can intimate all the Overseas Pakistanis , whose votes have already been registered , who are residing outside the Country about the detail s of their votes so they may make arrang ement s well before the time to report to any of the Diplomatic Mission for the purpose of casting the vote if the procedure tentatively discussed and noted hereinabove is adopted . (4) However, any other procedure or method which is acceptable under the law and requires no legislation can be adopted and if legislation is required , the concern authorit ies with the cooperation of the learned Attorney General for Pakistan may do the needful expeditiously before the forth coming General Elections, so that all the Const.

[13] P No.39 & 90 -2011 7 Overseas Citizens of Pakistan are given an opportunity to cast their votes. 8. The learned Attorney General for Pakistan stated that he needs some time to hold a meeting with all the concerned authorit ies i.e. M inistries of Law and Overseas Pakistan is as well as the Election Commission of Pakistan , therefore, the case is adjourned for 22nd February, 2013, enabling all con cerned to consider the options noted hereinabove and in the meantime, the learned Attorney General for Pakistan shall contact all c oncerned quarters for the purpose noted hereinabove.