Case No: C.P.L.A.4188/2019
Case Title: Hubdar Hussain Malik v. Deputy Commissioner Chakwal & another
Subject: Writ Petition
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed
Judgment Date: 05-08-2020
Upload Date: 20-08-2020
Citations: 2020 SCMR 1507
SC Citations: 2020 SCP 173
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._4188_2019.pdf

[1] judgment dated 01.10.2019 of the Lahore High Court, Rawalpindi Bench passed in Intra Court Appeal No.63 of 2019) Hubdar Hussain Malik .…Petitioner(s) Versus Deputy Commissioner Chakwal and another ….Res pondent (s) For the Petitioner(s): Mr. Hassan Raza Pasha, ASC For the Respondent(s): N.R. Date of hearing: 05.08.2020.

[2] ORDER Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J.- The petitioner, a Shiite Muslim, sought issuance of a mandamus for security arrangement s regarding a procession during the month of Moharram -ul-Haram that he claimed to be an annual ritual in the village since the time immemorial ; relying upon various Articles of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, he prayed the High Court to issue appropriate direction s to the Deputy Commissioner Chakwal to set in place the measures suggested in the Constitution petition ; the request was disposed of by a learned Judge - in-Chamber , in the following terms: “…..As Deputy Commissioner, Chakwal/respondent No.1 has a lready sent an intimation to the District Police Officer Chakwal/respondent No.2 for provision of security as per previous practice/SOPs and Assistant Commissioner as well as DSP, in attendance, ensure that they will make best efforts that no untoward situation occurs and provide the security as per law; learned counsel for the petitioner feels satisfied and under instructions states that they will conclude the Majlis within 45 minutes, hence, the petition is disposed of as such.” The petitioner sought review of the order through an application, dismissed in limine on 18.9.2019 ; his next move through an Intra Court Appeal met Civil Petition No.4188 of 2019 2 with no better fate on 01.10.2019 , as the event had by then peacefully passed by. 2.

[3] Learned counsel for the p etitioner contends that notwithstanding the flux of time a permanent security arrangement as proposed by the petitioner is required to ensure peace and tranquility during the month of Moharram -ul-Haram and, thus, it was incumbent upon the High Court to issue the directions prayed for . 3.

[4] Heard. 4. Subject to law, public order and morality, the Constitution confers upon every citizen the right to profess, practice and propagate his religion ; in a normal/ ideal situation, profession and practice of a parti cular faith by a believer or group thereof should not pose any issue , calling for intervention of State functionaries , however, the state of affair s unfortunately , over the time, has deteriorated alarmingly ; routine events of the past have now become, more often than not, security nightmares with no recession or respite being in sight , therefore, with mounting pressures and threats , the functionaries , tasked with the responsibility to maintain peace and tranquility in the society in order to ensure safety of human lives, must be provided autonomy of discretion with enough space to carry out the ir job without let or hindrance ; security measures are resource intensive arrangements with financial impact s upon public exchequer, therefore, it is essentia l as well as expedient that exercise of freedom is reasonably regulated on administrative considerations on the paramountcy of larger public interest .

[5] The functionaries are the best Judges to evaluate the nature and magnitude of threat s so as to take all appropriate remedial measures /steps required to obviate impending disaster s; these are no t justiciable issues and, thus, the learned Judge -in-Chamber had rightly heeded the report submitted by the Deputy Commissioner Chakwal ; peaceful conclusion of the eve nt amply vindicates his position.

[6] Petition fails. Leave declined. Judge Judge Islamabad, the 5th August, 2020 Not approved for reporting Azmat /- Civil Petition No.4188 of 2019 3