Case No: C.P.L.A.78-K/2015
Case Title: Moula Bux Shaikh and others v. The Chief Minister Sindh and others
Subject: Service/Promotion
Judge: Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed
Judgment Date: 03-10-2018
Upload Date: 09-03-2019
Citations: 2018 SCMR 2098
SC Citations: 2019 SCP 45
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/C.P._78_K_2015.pdf

[1] order dated 21.11.2014 passed by the Sindh Service Tribunal, Karachi, in Appeal No.195 of 2014] Maula Bux Shaikh & others Petitioner(s) VERSUS Chief Minister Sindh & others Respondent(s) ******** For Petitioner No.1 : Mr. Salah -ud-Din Ahmed, ASC For Petitioner Nos.2 -3 : Mr. Rasheed A Rizvi, Sr. ASC For Respondent Nos.1 -4 : Mr.

[2] Sa btain Mehmood, Ass tt:A.G. Sindh For Respondent No.5 : Mr. Ghulam Haider Shaikh, ASC For Respondent Nos.6 -7 & 9 : Nemo For Respondent Nos.8 & 12 : Dr. Muhammad Farough Naseem, ASC For R spdnt Nos.10 -11, 13 -17 : Mr. M. Aqil Awan, Sr. ASC Date of Hearing : 24.04.2018 JUDGMENT GULZAR AHMED, J .— Maula Bux Shaikh, Petitioner No.1, (the Petitioner) had filed a Service Appeal before the Sindh Service Tribunal, Karachi, (the Tribunal) challenging Notification No.SOI(W&S)E/12 - dated 19.03.2014 to be ultra vires the Pakistan Engineering Council Act, 197 6 (PEC Act).

[3] The circumstances under which the Service Appeal was filed by the Petitioner are that he was employed as Sub Engineer BS -11 in th e year 1985 in the Works and Services Department, Government of Sindh, Karachi. He was 5-C.P.No.78 -K of 2015.doc - 2 - promoted as Assistant Engineer BS -17 in the year 1997 and since then has been serving in such post in his said department.

[4] The case of the Petitioner is that he is a qu alified engineer holding degree of Bachelor of Engineering. He has unblemished service record and is eligible for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer BS -18 but on account of the notification, referred to above, his chance for promotion as Executive Engineer BS -18 has been gravely diminished for the reason that said notification has provided 13% promotion quota to Diploma holders and 7% promotion quota to B.Tech (Hons) Degree holders for the post of Executive Engineer BS -18.

[5] The grievance of the Pet itioner is that the post of Executive Engineer BS -18 being that of a purely professional engineering work could only be performed by a professional engineer holding accredited engineering qualification, as provided in the PEC Act . 2. We have heard learned ASCs for the parties at length and have gone through the record of the case.

[6] The learned ASC s for the parties have also filed their written note of arguments, which too have been perused by us. 3. The notification dated 19.03.2014 is as follows: “NOTIFICATION No.SOI(W&S)E.W/12 - : In pursuance of Sub - Rule (2) of Rule -3 of the Sindh Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules 1974 and in consultation with the Services, General Administration & Coordination Department, Governme nt of Sindh, and in partial modification of this Department’s Notification No.

[7] EI(C&W)1 - -84(86) dated 14.01.1987, the method, qualification and other conditions for appointment in respect of the post of Executive Engineer (BPS -18) (Civil/Mechanical/El ectrical) in Works & Services Department, Government of Sindh mentioned in column - 2 of the table below: - 5-C.P.No.78 -K of 2015.doc - 3 - TABLE Name of the post with BS METHOD OF APPOINTMENT 1 2 Executive Engineer (Civil/ Mechanical & Electrical) (BPS - 18) i) Eighty percent by promotion from amongst the Assistant Engineers B.E. in Civil, Electrical or Mechanical Engineering with atleast five years service in BPS -17 on seniority -cum- fitness basis with their respective technology. ii) Thirteen percent by promotion from amongst the Diploma holder Assistant Engineers having Diploma in Civil, Electrical or Mechanical Engineering with atl east five years service in BPS -17 on seniority -cum-fitness basis with their respective technology and iii) Seven percent by promotion from amongst the Assistant Engin eers having B.Tech (Hons) degree in Civil, Electrical or Mechanical Engineering with atleast five years service in BPS -17 on seniority -cum-fitness basis with their respective technology.

[8] QAZI SHAHID PERVEZ SECRETARY TO GOVT. OF SINDH ” 4. In order to regulate the engineering profession, the Parliament has passed PEC Act on 10.01.1976. Section 2(ii) of the PEC Act defines accredited engineering qualification, which is as follows: “accredited engineering qualification” means any of the qualific ation included in the First Schedule or the Second Schedule” 5.

[9] It is common ground that neither Diploma n or B.Tech (Hons) Degree are accredited engineering qualification for the reason that there is no reference to the Diploma and B.Tech (Hons) Degree i n the accredited engineering qualification provided in the first and second schedule of the PEC Act . Thus, accredited engineering qualification is ascribed to those who hold Bachelor Degree in Engineering from 5-C.P.No.78 -K of 2015.doc - 4 - accredited Engineering Universities/Instituti ons in Pakistan and abroad. 6.

[10] Professional Engineer is defined in Section 2(xxiii), which is as follows: “professional engineer” means a person who holds an accredited engineering qualification and after obtaining a professional experience of five yea rs, whether working privately or in the employment of an engineering public organization, has passed the prescribed engineering practice examination and is registered as such by the Council. 7.

[11] Professional Engineering Work is defined in Section 2(xxv) as follows: “professional engineering work” means the giving of professional advice and opinions, the making of measurements and layouts, the preparation of reports, computations, designs, drawings, plans and specifications and the construction, inspection and supervision of engineering works, in respect of — (a) railways, aerodromes, bridges, tunnels and metalled roads; (b) dams, canals, harbours, light houses; (c) works of an electrical, mechanical, hydraulic, communication, aeronautical power enginee ring, geological or mining character; (d) waterworks, sewers, filtration, purification and incinerator works; (e) residential and non -residential buildings, including foundations framework and electrical and mechanical systems thereof; (f) structures accessory to engineering works and intended to house them; (g) imparting or promotion of engineering education, training and planning, designing, development construction, commissioning, operation, maintenance and management of engineering works in resp ect of computer engineering, environmental engineering, chemical engineering, structural engineering, industrial engineering, production engineering, marine engineering and naval architecture, petroleum and gas engineering, metallurgical engineering, agric ultural engineering, telecommunication engineering, avionics and space engineering, transportation engineering, air -conditioning ventilation, cold storage works, system engineering, electronics, radio and television engineering, civil 5-C.P.No.78 -K of 2015.doc - 5 - engineering, electric al engineering, mechanical engineering and biomedical engineering etc; (h) organizing, managing and conducting the teaching and training in engineering universities, colleges, institutions, Government colleges of technology, polytechnic institutions and technical training institutions; (i) preparing standard bidding or contract documents, construction cost data, conciliation and arbitration procedures; guidelines for bid evaluation, prequalification and price adjustments for construction and consultancy contracts; and (j) any other work which the Council may, by notification in the official Gazette, declare to be an engineering work for the purposes of this Act; ” 8.

[12] Registered Engineer is defined in Section 2(xxvii) as follows: “registered engineer” means a person who holds an accredited engineering qualification, whether working privately or in the employment of an engineering public organization and is registered as such by the Council. Registered Engineer shall perform all professional engineering works except independently signing design. 9.

[13] Section 10(1) of the PEC Act provides: “ The engineering qualifications granted by engineering institutions in Pakistan which are included in the First Schedule shall be the accredited engineering qualifica tions for the purposes of this Act .” 10. While section 11(1) provides: “The engineering qualifications granted by engineering institutions outside Pakistan which are included in the Second Schedule shall be accredited engineering qualifications for the purposes of this Act. ” 11.

[14] Section 27 of the PEC Act provides for penalties and procedure, which is as follows: “27. Penalties and procedure .— (1) After such date as the Federal Government may, after consultation with the Council, by notification in th e official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, whoever undertakes any professional engineering work shall, if his name is not for the time being borne on the Register, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine whi ch may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both, and, in the case of a continuing offence, with a further fine which may extend to two hundred rupees for every day after the first during which the offence continues. 5-C.P.No.78 -K of 2015.doc - 6 - (2) After the date appointed as afo resaid, whoever employs for any professional engineering work any person whose name is not for the time being borne on the Register shall be punishable, on first conviction, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which ma y extend to five thousand rupees, or with both, and on a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both. (3) Whoever willfully procures or atte mpts to procure himself or itself to be registered under this Act as a registered engineer, professional engineer, consulting engineer, constructor or operator by making or producing or causing to be made or produced any false or fraudulent representation or declaration, either orally or in writing, and any person who assists him therein shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. (4) Whoever falsely pretends to be registered under this Act, or not being registered under this Act, uses with his name of title any words or letters representing that he is so registered, irrespective of whether any person is actually deceived by such pretence or represent ation or not, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. (5) No person undertaking any professional engineering work shall, unless he is registere d under this Act, be entitled to recover before any court or other authority any sum of money for services rendered in such work. (5A) No person shall, unless registered as a registered engineer or professional engineer, hold any post in an engineering o rganization where he has to perform professional engineering work. (6) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act save on complaint made by, or under the authority of, the Council. (7) No court inferior to that of a Magistr ate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act. ” 12.

[15] The main gist of the arguments of the learned ASC appearing for the petitioners is that the work of Executive Engineer BS -18 is strictly that of a Professional Engineer and it ca n only be performed by a Professional Engineer, who has engineering degree from an Accredited Engineering Institution of Pakistan or abroad as included in the first and second schedule of the PEC Act , Diploma holders and B.Tech 5-C.P.No.78 -K of 2015.doc - 7 - (Hons) Degree holders are no t professional engineers and cannot perform work of a Professional Engineer and that law specifically provides penalties to those who perform professional engineering work without possessing accredited engineering qualification and registered as Profession al Engineer by the Pakistan Engineering Council (the Council) . 13.

[16] On the other hand, learned ASC appearing for the respondents have contended that this very issue has come up before this Court number of times and this Court has dealt with it time and a gain and held that in the matter of employment and promotion etc, the Government Institutions are legally entitled to take decisions as a matter of policy to grant promotion to employee s in Engineering Public Organization who are Diploma holders in enginee ring and B.Tech (Hons) Degree holders. 14.

[17] We have noted that the Tribunal in the impugned judgment has referred to number of judgments of this Court and the point in issue in those judgments substantially also deals with the present controversy before us . Thus before dilating upon the matter, it is essential that we examine the judgments, which this Court has already delivered and are also referred in the impugned judgment of the Tribunal.

[18] The first case in line is a judgment of three member s bench of thi s Court in the cases of PAKISTAN DIPLOMA ENGINEERS FEDERATION (REGISTERED) THROUGH ITS CHAIRMAN V/s FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN THROUGH SECRETARY MINISTRY OF WATER & POWER, GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN, ISLAMABAD & 9 OTHERS (1994 SCMR 1807 ). In this case the question involved was whether the Diploma Engineers employed in Pakistan Railways can be debarred from promotion to Grade -18 on the 5-C.P.No.78 -K of 2015.doc - 8 - ground that they are not registered as “professional engineers and consulting engineers” with Pakistan Engineering Council even thou gh they were otherwise by reasons of their seniority etc eligible for promotion to Grade -18.

[19] While referring to the case of MUHAMMAD AZIM JAMALI AND 11 OTHERS V/S GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN, THROUGH SECRETARY/ CHAIRMAN, MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS, AND 33 OTHERS (PLJ 1992 Karachi 1) = (1992 PLC(CS) 637), where sp lit decision was given by two Hon’ble Judges of Sindh High Court an d ultimately it was referred to a Referee Judge for his opinion.

[20] This Court in dealing with the case before it relied upon the conclusion reached by the Referee Judge and quoted the same in the judgment as follows : “16. The conclusion of the learned Chief Justice was expressed as follows: “A careful reading of subsections (1) and (2) of section 27 of the Act will show that the penalties presc ribed in the section are attracted only against those persons who are not registered under the Act but undertake any professional engineering work as defined in the Act.

[21] Similarly, the person who employs a person who is not registered under the Act, on a p rofessional engineering work, is equally liable for punishment under the Act. The above provisions are wide enough to include the cases of those persons who may be employed in any private or Governmental organization and are called upon to undertake any pr ofessional engineering work.

[22] The provisions of the Act, regarding registration of professional engineer and consulting engineer, therefore, in my view, would not be applicable to the persons serving as engineer with the Railways, as in course, of their suc h employment they neither act as ‘professional engineer’ nor as ‘consulting engineer’.

[23] However, if such persons undertake any professional engineering work as defined under the Act, then the provisions regarding registration under the Act will be attracte d and they could also be punished in accordance with the provision of section 27 of the Act for violating the provision of the Act.” 5-C.P.No.78 -K of 2015.doc - 9 - 15.

[24] On the basis of such conclusion of the Referee Judge, this Court proceeded to make its ow n observation , which is as follows: 17. The above judgment of the High Court was not challenged either by the qualified engineers who held degrees from recognized Institutions of Pakistan nor by the diploma -holders but only by the Pakistan Engineering Council (which was one of the respondents in the Constitution Petition filed in the High Court).

[25] According to the Pakistan Engineering Council, the provisions of the Pakistan Engineering Council Act had not been correctly interpreted because the judgment of the majority in the High C ourt, it appeared to the Council had laid down that the Act applied to engineers engaged in professional engineering works in the private sector whereas the application of provisions of the Act according to them, could not be restricted only to the private practitioners alone. 18.

[26] We on the other hand after hearing Mr. Abid Hassan Minto learned Advocate for the appellant at considerable length consider that this is not a correct interpretation of the judgment of the High Court. The High Court has clearly stated that the provisions of the Act were wide enough to include cases of those persons engaged in professional engineering works whether employed in any private or Governmental organization, if they are called upon to undertake any professional engineeri ng work, as defined under the Act.

[27] In fact in the connected case C.A.No.31 of 1992 a Committee of Secretaries constituted by the Punjab Government correctly summed up the true position obtaining in the Act as follows: -- “The Committee was of the view that the Government could appoint a non -graduate engineer to a post in any grade but if the post involved performance of professional engineering work such appointment would attract penalties prescribed in the Act.

[28] The finding of the Referee Judge in this cas e is to the same effect and in our opinion this finding is quite correct.” 16. The next case in line is a judgment of five member bench of this Court in the case of FIDA HUSSAIN V/S THE SECRETARY, KASHMIR AFFAIRS AND NORTHERN AFFAIRS DIVISION, ISLAMABAD & ANOTHER (PLD 1995 Supreme Court 701).

[29] In this case facts were that petitioner was appointed as Overseer/Sub -Engineer in northern area PW D in 5-C.P.No.78 -K of 2015.doc - 10 - 1971. The Federal Government, in order to encourage the diploma holders to improve their academic qualification resolve d to prescribe courses namely B.Tech (Pass) and B.Tech (Hons).

[30] The later was treated as equivalent to B .Sc. (Engineering ) and Bachelor of Engineering for the purpose of promotion. Petitioner having passed B.Tech (Pa ss) and B Tech (Hons) was denied p romotion in BPS -17 for the reasons that B.Tech (Hons) was not recognized by Pakistan Engineering Council as equivalent to B .Sc. (Engineering ) Degree.

[31] Petitioner filed Service Appeal , which was dismissed. The Appeal filed by the petitioner before this Court was also dismissed. The petitioner then applied for review , which was allowed and the judgment dismissing the Civil Appeal was recalled and his appeal was allowed with directions to consider the petitioner’s case of promotion to BS -17.

[32] The Court while all owing relief to the petitioner observed as follows: “9. In this regard, we may point out that it is the domain of the Government concerned to decide whether a particular academic qualification of a civil servant/ employee is sufficient for promotion from one Grade to another higher Grade and whereas it is in the domain of the Pakistan Engineering Council to decide, as to whether a particular academic qualification can be equated with another academic qualification, but it has no power to say that the civi l servants/employees holding particular academic qualification cannot b e promoted from a particular Grade to a higher Grade.

[33] The main object of the Act as pointed out by one of us (Ajmal Mian, J.) and Saiduzzaman Siddiqui, C.J. (as he then was) in the abo ve High Court judgment is to regulate the working of professional engineers and consulting engineers and not to regulate the qualification or the working of the engineers in the Government or semi -Government departments.

[34] The definitions of the terms “prof essional engineer” and “professional engineering work” given in clauses (j) and (k) of section 2 o the Act are to be read together and, therefore, as a corollary to the same, it must follow that the term “professional engineering work” as defined in clause (k) of section 2 of the Act is to be performed by a professional engineer as defined in clause (j) thereof, which is evident from section 8 of the Act, which defines the functions of the Pakistan Engineering Council as under: - 8.

[35] Functions of the Council .--- The following shall be the functions of the Council, namely: -- 5-C.P.No.78 -K of 2015.doc - 11 - (a) maintenance of a Register of person qualified to practice as professional engineers and consulting engineers; (b) recognition of engineering qualifications for the purpose of registr ation of professional engineers and consulting engineers; (c) removal of names from the Register and restoration to the Register of names which have been removed; (d) laying down of standards of conduct for the members; (e) safeguarding the interest of the members; (f) promotion of reforms in the engineering profession; (g) management of the funds and properties of the Council; (h) Promotion of engineering education and review of courses of studies in consultation with the Universities; (i) levy and c ollection of fees from applicants for registration or temporary licences and members; (j) exercise of such disciplinary powers over the members and servants of the Council as may be prescribed; (k) formation of such committees s may be prescribed; and (l) performance of all other functions connected with, or ancillary or incidental to, the aforesaid functions.” A perusal of the above quoted section shows that the Pakistan Engineering Council is vested with the functions to regulate the persons qualified to practice as professional engineers and consulting engineers and not person s who are employed in the Government or semi - Government organisations.

[36] If the Government employs a professional engineer as defined in the Act for performing professional engine ering work as envisaged by the Act in above clause (k) of section 2, the provisions of the Act would be attracted and not otherwise. 10. Reverting to the merits of the present case , as pointe d out hereinabove, that the petitioner pursuant to the above dec ision of the Government of Pakistan dated 26.10.1973 passed his B.Tech (Pass) in 1977 and B.Tech (Honours) in March, 1981, from the NED University Karachi, and, therefore, acted upon the above representation of the Government.

[37] In this view of the matter, it is not just and fair not to consider the petitioner 5-C.P.No.78 -K of 2015.doc - 12 - for promotion to BPS -17 keeping in view the admitted fact that a number of other civil servants/employees in the same department in the same position have been promoted by the departments/organisations concerned.

[38] In this behalf, it may be pertinent to refer to the case of Mukhtar Ahmad and 37 others v. Government of West Pakistan through the Secretary, Food and Agriculture, Civil Secretariat, Lahore and another (PLD 1971 SC 846). The fact of the above case were that the persons possessing the qualifications mentioned in Rule 7 of the West Pakistan Agricultural Engineering Service (Class II) Rules, 1963 were not available.

[39] The Government launched a scheme for training of Assistant Agricultural Engineer s, whereunder 46 Graduates in B.Sc. Agriculture were to be selected for appointment as Assistant Agricultural Engineers after their successful completion of two years’ diploma course at an Agricultural University. The above scheme was discussed by the gov ernment with the Public Service Commission.

[40] The candidates selected by the Public Service Commission, who were about to complete their training of two years, were informed by the government that they would have to appear again before the Public Service Co mmission to be selected for appointment to the posts of Assistant Agricultural Engineers (Class -II).

[41] The candidates asserted that after the completion of their training they were entitled to be appointed as Assistant Agricultural Engineers (Class -II) in terms of the offer made to them and they could not be required to appear again before the Public Service Commission for such appointment. On the other hand, the Government contended that the candidates did not possess the qualification prescribed by Rule 7 of the West Pakistan Agricultural Engineering Service (Class II) Rules, 1963, for appointment to such posts.

[42] The matter came up for hearing before this Court in the form of an appeal with the leave of this Court filed by the candidates against the judgme nt of a Division Bench of the erstwhile High Court of West Pakistan. The same was allowed and inter alia the following was concluded: -- “The offer of the Government and its acceptance by the appellants constituted a valid agreement and they Governor’s or der dated the 1st July, 1965 provided the authority for such an agreement.

[43] This agreement is capable of being enforced in law. The Government was both competent and obliged to implement that agreement. When the Governor’s order, dated the 1st July, 1965 , provided a special authority for recruitment to the 46 posts of Assistant Agricultural Engineers, rule 7 of the Recruitment Rules was not applicable in this case.” 11.

[44] The above case supports the petitioner’s stand. Another aspect which escaped notice of this Court in the judgment under review is that some of the other civil servants/employees placed in the same position as the petitioner was had been considered for promotion to BPS - 17 and in fact were promoted, whereas the petitioner was 5-C.P.No.78 -K of 2015.doc - 13 - denied the abo ve benefit which amounted to violation of inter alia Article 25 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973.

[45] In this regard, reference may be made to the case of I.A. Sherwani and others v. Government of Pakistan through Secretary, Finan ce Division, Islamabad and others (1991 SCMR 1041). 12. The judgment of this Court in the case of Muhammad Siddique Nasim (supra) relied upon by the Tribunal is distinguishable for more than one reason, firstly, in the above case the notification of the Government of Punjab dated 8.2.1961 equivalising B.Tech (Honours) with B.Sc Engineering degree was withdrawn on 15.03.1985, whereas the petitioner received degree of B.Tech (Honours) in June, 1985, i.e. after the withdrawn of the notification whereas in the present case, admittedly the petitioner passed his B.Tech (Honours) in March, 1981, before the Pakistan Engineering Council through its Registrar’s above letter dated 24.4.1984 stated that there was typographical error in the above -quoted portion of its Registrar’s letter dated 30.04.1981.

[46] Secondly, in the judgment in the case of Pakistan Diploma Engineers Federation (Registered) through its Chairman (supra), this Court affirmed the majority view of the High Court of Sindh in the case of Muhammad Azim Jam ali (supra), in which it has been held that the provisions of the Act are applicable only to professional engineers and consulting engineers who are in practice and not to the persons working in the Government departments, autonomous bodies, local authorit ies and private firms or companies. 13.

[47] We may again observe that it is exclusively within the domain of the Government to decide whether a particular qualification will be considered sufficient for promotion from a particular Grade to a higher Grade an d it is also within the domain of the Government to change the above policy from time to time as nobody can claim any vested right in the policy.

[48] However, it cannot abdicate its power to decide the above question in favour of a corporate body which is not in its control nor it can act in a manner which may be violative of Article 25 of the Constitution on account of being discriminatory. It is still open to the Government for future to provide that academic qualification of B.Tech (Honours) will not be considered sufficient for promotion from BPS -16 to BPS - 17 if the same does not violate the above principle.” 17.

[49] Next case is a judgment of two members bench of this Court in the case of MUHAMMAD YOUNUS AARAIN V/S PROVINCE OF SINDH THROUGH CHIEF SECRETARY, SINDH, KARACHI & 10 OTHERS (2007 SCMR 134). The case before the Court was of promotion to BS -20 by a Diploma holder employee. The Court dealt with the subject and observed as follows: 5-C.P.No.78 -K of 2015.doc - 14 - “7.

[50] The basic qualification for a professional engineer under the law is B.Sc. degree in engineering from a recognized institution in Pakistan and diploma in engineering is not a recognized qualification for a professional engineer in terms of PEC Act, 1976. The service rules governing the service of the petitioner (SCUG S ervice Rules, 1982) and the promotion policy of the Government of Sindh, would neither override the provisions of the above Act nor relax the requirement of basic qualification of professional engineer for a promotion to BPS -20 in the engineering branch of Government of Sindh.

[51] The relevant provision of SCUG Service Rules, 1982, is reproduced hereunder: -- “V-Engineering Branch. 1. Grade 20 By selection on merit from among the members of the service in Grade -19 of the Engineering Branch with at least 17 year s experience as such in Grade -17 and above.” 8. The above rule envisages clearly that a person can be considered for promotion to BPS -20 in the Engineering Branch of Government of Sindh, subject to fulfilment of the condition of basic qualification of a p rofessional engineer prescribed under Pakistan Engineering Council Act, 1976 and a diploma holder being not a professional engineer in terms of PEC Act, 1976 cannot hold a post carrying responsibilities of a qualified professional engineer.

[52] The eligibilit y of a person for promotion from BPS-19 to BPS -20 in the Engineering Department of Government of Sindh is subject to the fulfilment of the requirement of basic qualification with requisite experience as provided in SCUG Service Rules, 1982 in the relevant field therefore, neither any concession could be given to the petitioner in the matter of his eligibility to hold the post in BPS -20 nor the requirement of basic qualification could be relaxed by the Court or by Selection Board.

[53] The careful examination of rules on the basis of which petitioner asserted the claim of promotion to BPS - 20 against the post carrying responsibilities of a professional engineer, would show that his claim was without any substance and that a diploma holder on the basis of his exper ience alone, would stand at par to a person registered as professional engineer with Pakistan Engineering Council.” 18.

[54] The other case is a judgment of three members bench of this Court in the case of NAZIR -UL-HASAN & 2 OTHERS V/S SYED ANWAR IQBAL & OTHE RS (2014 SCMR 1827). In this case , respondent No.1 was working as an Assistant Director BS -17. The petitioners were senior to him and were promoted to BS -18 despite the fact that petitioners were holding qualification of Diploma whereas respondent 5-C.P.No.78 -K of 2015.doc - 15 - No.1 wa s Bachelor of Engineering ( Electrical ).

[55] The respondent No.1 challenged the promotions of petitioners in the High Court. The High Court set aside all promotions of petitioners on the ground that they did not hold valid engineering degree. This Court in the report ed judgment has dealt with the matter and observed as follows: - “6. Admittedly the petitioners were Assistant Directors in the respondent Authority with at least 5 years service in the relevant field and hence in our opinion they fulfill the requi rement.

[56] It would be seen that when the petitioners were considered for promotion in 2012 the rules in force were the Pakistan Standards Institution Recruitment Rules for class one posts wherein per rule 5 the post of deputy Directors to be filled in by pro motion could be done from amongst Assistant Directors category one with at least 5 years service in the Institution.

[57] Nowhere in the said rules was it provided that they would be professional engineers or for that matter even diploma holders. If fact such condition is prescribed in rule 6 which provides for direct appointments whereby per the schedule to the same an Assistant Director must hold a Master’s Degree in Science or Bachelors Degree in Engineering in the specified field from a recognized universit y with at least 3 years experience in that field etc.

[58] Admittedly, the petitioners were appointed by promotion and hence in our opinion no such condition can be placed upon them as in the case of a direct appointees. Insofar as the case of Muhammad Younus Aarain (supra) is concerned, the same is distinguishable on facts as therein it was found that under Sindh Council Unified Grades Services Rules the basic qualification for promotion to BS -20 was that the candidates should have B.Sc.

[59] Degree in Engineering . As observed above this is not the case in the present matter. It would further be seen that now per section 26 of the Pakistan Standards and Quality Control Authority Act, 1996 rules have been framed which have been notified in the official gazette on 15th May, 2013. Under Rule 5 promotion to the post in BS-1 to 19 shall be made on the basis of seniority -cum- fitness etc. and he or she should also fulfil the conditions contained in schedule to the rules according to which for promotion to the post of D eputy Director Technical the eligible person would be an Assistant Director Technical and he should have 5 years experience in BS -17 in technical matters.

[60] Nowhere has it been prescribed that he or she should be a qualified engineer. 7. In the circumstance s, we find that the impugned order has unnecessarily been influenced by the comments of the Pakistan Engineering Council that no post carrying any Engineering responsibility could be entrusted to non - engineering graduates.

[61] In our opinion, it is for the department/institution itself to determine as to whether the, persons in its service are fit to hold a particular position. In the present case it has been done by the 5-C.P.No.78 -K of 2015.doc - 16 - authority and rules have been framed thereunder which have been followed by the promotes/ petitioners.

[62] Consequently the impugned order is set aside and the promotion of the petitioners is upheld.” 19. On examination of above case law, we note that nowhere in the judgment s, the government power to prescribe for qualification and other conditi ons of service for promotion to a post has been assailed nor the judgment s have put any sort of embargo on the government in prescribing the qualification and other conditions of service for a post for the purpose of promotion.

[63] Having said this, the judgme nts as discussed above, ha ve rather focused on the government power in this regard to be unfettered to the extent that it is not in derogation of any law or provision s of the Constitution. 20. Further, t he main principle that is de ductible from the abov e judgments of this Court is that it is the domain of the Government to decide whether a particular academic qualification of a civil servant/ employee is sufficient for promotion from one grade to another higher grade and whereas it is in the domain of th e Pakistan Engineering Council to decide whether a particular academic qualification can be equated with another academic qualification but it has no power to say that the civil servants/employees holding particular academic qualification cannot be promote d from a particular grade to a higher grade.

[64] Thus on the basis of above pronouncement s of this Court , it is clear that the notification dated 19.03.2014 cannot be validly or justifiably challenged on the ground that it i mpinges or infringes upon any of the provision s of PEC Act, 1976 and thus would be ultravires. No such finding can justifiably be recorded in that as it has been laid down quite empathetically that the government exercises its own power under the domain of law with regard to promotion of civ il 5-C.P.No.78 -K of 2015.doc - 17 - servants/employees under Sindh Civil Servant s Act, 1973 and Rules made thereunder while PEC Act does not overreach or put an embargo upon the government in the matter of prescribing of qualification and other conditions of service of civil servants /empl oyees for their promotion to higher grade.

[65] Yet again, we note that although the vires of notification dated 19.03.2014 ha s been challenged but we observe that this very notification has been issued under sub -rule (2) of Rule 3 of Sindh Civil Servants ( Appointment , Promotion & Transfer) Rules, 1974, which rules have been made under section 26 of Sindh Civil Servants Act, 1973.

[66] Neither rule 3(2) of said rules nor section 26 of the Act, 1973 have been challenged nor their vires called in question before us. Th us from this also it is quite apparent that the petitioner does not challenge the government power for prescribing qualification and conditions of service of civil servants/employees for their promotion to higher grade.

[67] In any case, we note that the provis ions of PEC Act nor the rules and regulations made under it will operate as bar on government to prescribe for qualification and other conditions of service of civil servants/employees for promotion to higher grade. 21. The PEC Act as its preamble itself shows so also reading of the whole Act shows that it essentially deals with regulations of engineering profession in it, inter alia , it prescribes for qualification of professional engineers, maintenance of register of professional engineers and accrediti ng of engineering universities etc and not as a regulator of employment be that be of government service or in the private service.

[68] The reasons for it could be found that all sort of engineering work could not be and may not be a professional engineering w ork for performance of which professional engineers are required. For example, technician , mechanic , draftsman, foreman, 5-C.P.No.78 -K of 2015.doc - 18 - supervisor and overseer etc at best could be a skilled workman who may work independently or under the supervision of professional engineer and for such technician , mechanic, draftsman, foreman, supervisor and overseer the employer may not require holding of professional engineering degree.

[69] However, if the person is required to perform any of professional engineering work as defined under the PEC Act, the provisions of this Act will come into operation for ensuring as the work of professional engineer can and only be performed by professional engineer as recognized by PEC Act. The professional engineering work has been clearly defined unde r section 2(xxv) of the PEC Act which has already been reproduced above and lays down in sufficient details the works which are noted to be as professional engineering works and such works as mandatorily required by the PEC Act to be performed by a profess ional engineer possessing accredited engineering qualification from accredited engineering institutions in Pakistan and abroad with experience and passing of test of the Council and no other person is allowed to perform professional engineering works be th at be a diploma holder or B.Tech. degree holder.

[70] This aspect of the matter has been substantially addressed by the PEC Act itself when making provision of section 27(5A) that “no person shall unless registered as a registered engineer or professional engin eer, hold any post in an engineering organization where he has to perform professional engineering work. ” Thus professional engineering work can only be performed by a person who is registered as registered engineer or professional engineer and both regist ered engineer and professional engineer in terms of the PEC Act are by law required to possess accredited engineering qualification as prescribed by the PEC Act from accredited engineering institution. 5-C.P.No.78 -K of 2015.doc - 19 - 22.

[71] We may further observe that section 27 of the PEC Act provides for penalty for a person who undertakes any professional engineering work if his name is not borne on the Register but it also makes the employer who employs for any professional engineering work any person whose name is not , for the time be ing, borne on the Register to perform professional engineering work, shall also be liable for penalty as prescribed in the PEC Act itself.

[72] Thus both civil servant/employee and their employer would be liable to penalty as provided under section 27 if they u ndertake or allow a person to undertake professional engineering work whose name is not borne on register under PEC Act. 23. The net result of above discussion is that this petition fails.

[73] It is dismissed and leave refused , however with note of caution t hat government shall not allow or permit any person to perform professional engineering work as defined in the PEC Act , who does not possess accredited engineering qualification from the accredited engineering institution and hi s name is not registered as a registered engineer or professional engineer under the PEC Act .

[74] JUDGE Bench -IV Islamabad *Hashmi* JUDGE APPROVED F OR REPORTING JUDGE Announced in open Court on 03.10.2018 . JUDGE