Case No: C.P.L.A.943-K/2022
Case Title: Province of Sindh through Chief Minister & others v. Sartaj Hyder
Subject: Writ Petition/Others
Judge: Mrs. Justice Ayesha A. Malik
Judgment Date: 21-10-2022
Upload Date: 16-01-2023
Citations: 2023 SCMR 459
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 20
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._943_k_2022.pdf

[1] JUDGMENT AYESHA A. MALIK, J .- The instant Civil Petition (CP No.943-K of 2022 ) along with connected Petitions impugns interim order s dated 01.09.2022 and 06.09.2022 , passed by the High Court of Sindh, Bench at Sukkur and Circuit Court Larkana (High Court ). The orders have been passed in petitions filed by the Respondent s in relation to the relief work carried out by the Petitioner s in the flood affected areas of Sindh, mainly Khairpur, Ghotki and Naushahro Feroze . 2.

[2] The Petitioner s before the Co urt are the Province of Sindh and Director General , Provincial Disaster Management Authority (PDMA ), amongst others , whose grievance against the impugned orders is that the Court has directed the relevant Commissioners to constitute a citizens committee in every Taluka of Sukkur Division , Larkana Division , Shaheed Benazirabad Division and Naushahro Feroze District and directed that such citizens committee be headed by a Civil Judge and that the said committee s work under the supervision CPs No.943 -K of 2022 , etc - 3 - of the concerned Dis trict and Sessions Judge .

[3] The Petitioner s are also aggrieved with the directions given that the citizens committee s are to look after the affairs of the tent city. Mr. Hassan Akhtar, Advocate General Sindh, argued that the impugned orders have placed the Provincial and District administration , responsible for disaster management including the provision of relief work under the control of the citizens committee s which are headed by Civil Judge s.

[4] Consequently, the Court has exceeded its jurisdiction as it has directed judges to enter the domain of the executive by requiring them to oversee relief work . He adds that the orders were beyond the court’s jurisdiction and have placed relief efforts in the hands of the citizen s committee . He explained that the Petiti oners are striving hard to ensure that adequate relief is provided to the affected areas and that any lapse or deficiencies in the same are not on account of negligence or ineffective management by the Petitioners but are due to vastness of the area which is affected by the flooding coupled with the lack of resources .

[5] He elaborates that a ccess to these areas is also an issue as roads, railway lines, bridges have been damaged or destroyed and large parts of these areas are under water . Despite these challeng es, he states, that best efforts are being made and that these committees will hamper progress. He explained that distribution of relief items to the calamity affected area s is the responsibility of the District Disaster Management Authority ( DDMA ) and the PDMA coordinates all relevant departments for actions required in response to the floods .

[6] As per the record of the Government CPs No.943 -K of 2022 , etc - 4 - of Sindh , there has been an unprecedented amount of rainfall in the month of July and August 2022 with 307% and 561 % over and abo ve the annual average , respectively . He stated that t he recent spell of rain has impacted the entire Province of Sindh such that 30 districts are under water which has led to loss of infrastructure and resources and has brought about a humanitarian crisis .

[7] He further submits that the re is a legal framework in place under the National Disaster Management Authority Act, 2010 ( Act) whereby the PDMA and the DDMA are functional and are carrying out relief work . He added that a s per notification dated 24.06.2014 issued by the Government of Sindh, Services, General Administration and Coordination Department , two representatives from the business community , three representatives from the civil society or ganisations and two representatives from the agriculture sector are nominated as members of the DDMA.

[8] Hence, he states , that civil society is already a part of the existing framework and so there was no reason to make a citizens committee . 3. On behalf of the Respondent s, who are affectees of the calamity affected areas of districts of the Province of Sindh, it is stated that no relief work is being provided in their area, hence, petitions were filed seeking direction s that the Petitioner s take immediate action to provide food and shelter to the residents of the are a and also to drain out the water from the lands of the Respondent s so that they are able to inhabit and cultivate their lands once again.

[9] Discriminatory acts of the PDMA Sukkur have been highlighted by the Respondents ; one CPs No.943 -K of 2022 , etc - 5 - of the m, has also stated that th e government hierarchy is only saving the lands of the political elite by diverting water towards the villagers’ land ; that half of the draining disposal machines are out of order ; that proper evaluation of loss of the affected areas is also required for r ehabilitation purposes .

[10] Ghulam Shabbir, Advocate High Court, one of the residents of Dadu District , has filed CMA No.7960 of 2022 for impleading him as party to bring on record the destruction of his district and failure of the government in its rehabilita tion. He adds that there is no presence of the PDMA or the DDMA in his district despite the fact they have prepared documents relating to contingency plan and disaster management plan yet nothing has been implemented in this area. 4.

[11] Mr. Faisal Siddiqui , ASC was appointed as amicus curiae by the Court vide order dated 05.10.2022 to assist on the issue of the courts ’ jurisdiction to establish citizens committee . He has submitted his report and argued that the issue raised by the Petitioner s is the role as signed to judicial officers in the impugned orders and the controlling powers given to the District and Sessions Judge to supervise the citizens committee s as well as the work of the tent city/relief camp.

[12] He states that the courts are always reluctant to interfere in ad - interim orders except in exceptional circumstances. As per his opinion , the citizens committee s are in the nature of commissions which this Court has established as was seen in cases reported as Marvi Memon v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2011 SC 854 ) where a commission was established , following CPs No.943 -K of 2022 , etc - 6 - the floods of 2010, for fact finding and submitting recommendations for relief efforts ; Petition regarding miserable condition of the schools: in re CP.

[13] No.37 of 2012 (2013 SCMR 764) where multiple c ommissions were established to carry out surveys of school functioning for fact finding purposes in order to assess the condition s and workings of the said schools ; Dr. Akmal Saleemi and others v. Federal Government and others (2013 SCMR 103 ) where a commi ssion was established for fact finding in a matter concerning extra judicial killings in the premises of Lal Masjid and Jamia Hafsa; and Suo Motu Case No.16 of 2011 along with CMAs (PLD 2013 SC 443 ) where a commission was constituted for fact finding purpo ses in order to assess if the lease agreements were legally sound .

[14] He stated that commissions are used for fact finding purposes , for putting together technical experts and also to propose sustainable solut ions in environmental issues. He stated that commi ssion s help buil d capacity to deal with extraordinary circumstances , as in the prese nt case , and it will only facilitate relief work and not hamper it.

[15] He further stated that the direction s of this Court vide its order dated 05.10.2022 requiring the citize ns committee to con tinue their oversight of relief work should continue both with reference to relief efforts and the management of the tent cities as doing so will not only improve coordination efforts in this time of crisis but will also ensure that the ground -level issues are raised before the relevant authorities . 5.

[16] We have heard all parties at length. The orders impugned are interim orders and this Court normally does not CPs No.943 -K of 2022 , etc - 7 - interfere with the interim orders of the High Court except in exceptional circ umstances , as held in the cases reported as Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Energy (Power Division), Islamabad and others v.

[17] Shafiq ul Hassan and others [2021 PLC (C.S.) 292 ] and Dossani Travels Pvt. Ltd and others v. Messrs Travels S hop (Pvt.) Ltd. and others (PLD 2014 SC 1 ). Without a doubt, it is noted that, these are exceptional circumstances. While the interim orders exceed the jurisdiction of the Court to the extent of the role assigned to the judicial officers , the plight of the affectees of the 20 22 floods needs attention in order to meet the needs of the flood affected population in Sindh.

[18] The biggest hindrance appears to be coordination and time frames for relief work as notwithstanding efforts made , it is neither sufficient n or is it effectively managed. The issue before the Court essentially is the exercise of jurisdiction by the High Court while creating the citizens committees and placing judges from the District Judiciary on these committees to oversee the work , being done by the committees .

[19] The role assigned to the judicial officers of overs eeing the work of the executive by heading the citizens committees essentially means that the judicial officers are performing executive functions which is against the principle of sepa ration of power s. The Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 does not contemplate assumption of functions by one organ that essentially belongs to another .

[20] Moreover planning and strategy , coordination, monitoring and implementation are the function s of the executive and is best CPs No.943 -K of 2022 , etc - 8 - left for them to fulfil their duty and obligation s in this regard. Furthermore, the work of these committees is a fulltime job which will require the judicial officer s to spend time on these committees which in turn take them away from their judicial work that is also not practical nor expedient . 6.

[21] We are informed that the relevant law on the subject is the Act, which establishes a National Disaster Management Commission (Commission ) for the purposes of policy maki ng. This Commission not only lays down the policy on disaster management but also approves a National Plan and Guidelines to be followed by the Federal and Provincial authorities in the event of a natural disaster.

[22] The Act also establishes a National Disas ter Management Authority (NDMA ) which is responsible for implementing , co-ordinating and monitoring the National Plan and Policy . As per Section 13 of the Act, a Provincial Disaster Management Commission (PDMC ) is established in each of the provinces , which lays down the Provincial Disaster Management Policy and also establishes the PDMA for the implementation, co -ordination and monitoring of the national as well as provincial plan in the event of a natural disaster.

[23] Section 18 of the Act constitutes the DDMA which works at the district level and is responsible for the preparation of Disaster Management Plan for the district , as well as implementing , co- ordinating and monitoring the National, Provincial and District plans at the district level. As per the powers and functions of the DDMA , they are required to provide relief to the community in response to any disaster, which include s shelter, food , CPs No.943 -K of 2022 , etc - 9 - drinking water and essential provisions, healthcare and services .

[24] They are also required to establish emergency communication system s and carry out relief efforts along with rescue operations in the area. Subsequent to the creation of the NDMA , a National Disaster Risk Reduction Policy was passed in 2013 , which seeks to reduce vulnerabilities and increase resilience in the event of a natural disaster.

[25] It also provides guideline s for timely intervention and for reducing disaster risk . Additionally , a Disaster Management Strategy (2015 to 2022 ) was framed and a National Policy Guideline on Vulnerable Groups in Disaster s 2014 (Policy Guidelines ) was framed which stresses on the importance of dealing with vulnerable members of the community in the face of a natural disaster. 7.

[26] Despite the legal framework formed under the Act, the real issue is the lack of coordination and information with respect to the relief efforts being made by the Petitioner s. It was argued before us that there are many parts of the Province of Sindh where relief efforts have not reached and where there is no food or drinkable water , nor any healt h care.

[27] Some of the cause s of concern voiced by the Respondent s was that roads, drainage, irrigation systems and sanitation systems are damaged or destroyed by the heavy rains and flooding . The supply of provisions and drinkable water is not enough; f amili es have been evacuated but face diseases in the tent cities such as dengue, malaria and gastroenteritis .

[28] The Petitioner s have admitted that there is difficulty not only on account of accessibility but also on account of resources including human CPs No.943 -K of 2022 , etc - 10 - resources to deal with the unprecedented floods . In this background, we find that the formation of the citizens committee s by the High Court , in principle , was to facilitate relief effort s in different areas within the Province of Sindh, however, the inclusion of th e members of the District Judiciary was not required given that there is an entire legal framework under the Act to ensure relief work right down to the district level.

[29] As per the scheme of the Act, members of the civil community which include volunteers , NGOs, doctors and other s can be made part of the Provincial and District Management Authorities to help relief efforts. The record show s that they have been included in the DDMA vide notification dated 24.06.2014 , however, there is no information on whethe r they actually participated .

[30] Section 3(2)(p) of the Act provides that National Commission shall also consist of representatives of civil society or any person appointed by the Prime Minister . As this is the policy making body , the inclusion of members of civil society on this Commission is imperative because for effective and efficient disaster management the inclusion of people likely to be affected is necessary not only for coordination, data collection and creating awareness but also to combine the efforts of the community and the authority in the event of a natural disaster .

[31] This gives civil society an opportunity to become part of the implementation, co -ordination and monitoring plan which only makes the work of the authority more effective. The Act al so provides under Section 8 that the NDMA shall consist of members as may be prescribed by its CPs No.943 -K of 2022 , etc - 11 - chairperson .

[32] This Authority is headed by the Prime Minister , who can include an y member as he deems appropriate. Similarly, at the provincial as well as the district level, the Act provides in its Section s 13 and 15 that members to the PDMA and DDMA may be nominated by the Chief Minister and by the District Authority to include any member as they deem appropriate .

[33] Under these provision s, member s of civil society can be included not only on the Commission but also in the Authorities to ensure that relief work is carried out where required and to help in mitigating the effects of the natural disaster as well as work on rehabilitation of the affectees . Hence, inclusio n of civil society is necessary. 8.

[34] These are unprecedented times , as per the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, more than 33 million people have been affected by the floods of which 14.5 million are in Sindh alone (ECH O Da ily Flash of 25 October 2022 – Pakistan) . Furthermore, despite the fact that the Act has provided its framework since 2010, the efficiency and effectiveness of the PDMA and DDMA is questioned by affectees.

[35] There is merit in this argument as there appea rs to be no monitoring system in place. In this context, participation by the public in the PDMA and DDMA and even at the Commission level ensures that the affectees are able to bring first hand their vulnerabilities and priorities , which results in a more measured response and proper allocation of resources where required .

[36] It also gives the Authority greater insight into the affected communities enabling them to work more effectively and CPs No.943 -K of 2022 , etc - 12 - produce better result. Community participation is not only necessary for planning disaster management but also for implementing and monitoring purposes as it gives people the right to participate in the decisions that affect their lives .

[37] This creates more awareness and a sense of ownership and responsibility which is requir ed, particularly in disaster management so to enhance effectiveness and engage the people with their communities to provide rescue , relief and rehabilitation efforts . Hence, citizen s’ participation in the PDMA and DDMA can improve coordination and response which will enable the government authorities to provide relief work in a more effective and efficient manner .

[38] Moving forward , it is fundamental to the composition of the Commission , the NDMA, the PDMA and the DDMA that membe rs of civil society are include d in it. 9. At present to deal with the issue in hand, the citizens committee s can work with DDMA to the extent of monitoring, coordination efforts and ensure that relief work reaches the affectees , who do not have sufficient assistance at the moment.

[39] The committee s can also facilitate the PDMA and the DDMA of Sindh in providing necessary information and data with reference to relief work and what is required which will improve the Authorities ’ coordination with affected areas and communication with affe cted areas especially due to the challenges of accessibility and communication failure.

[40] The citizens committee can, therefore , monitor the efforts of the PDMA and the DDMA which will not only lead to better results CPs No.943 -K of 2022 , etc - 13 - in the relief work but will also create a wareness within the affectees as to the manner in which the relief effort is being carried out will encourage them to participate.

[41] This participatory approach to a natural disaster humanizes the work of the authorities so that affectees are provided with r eal time relief that they need and not what the paperwork suggests. 10. In this regard, we also note that the impugned orders have directed that the citizens committee s should comprise of medical superintendents of the Taluka Hospital, Mukhtiarkar, focal person of PDMA and the President of the Taluka Bar Association .

[42] In this context , we find that the Policy Guidelines requires the participation of women in disaster management plan at all levels to ensure integration of the gender perspective. As per the Po licy Guidelines , women are at a greater risk from natural disasters than men . They are vulnerable and victim s in natural disaster s but also play a significant role throughout the disaster management cycle, without be ing adequately recognized and included i n the decision making.

[43] The Policy Guid elines also emphasizes on ensuring equal access to relief opportunities for victims without any discrimination which requires the need s of vulnerable groups to be targeted to ensure that their needs are attended, safeg uarded and protected . As per the Policy Guidelines , women, children, older persons, persons with disabilities are all defined as vulnerable groups in disaster.

[44] The NDMA and National Disaster Risk Reduction Policy all emphasize on reducing risks and vulnera bilities of those who are marginalized CPs No.943 -K of 2022 , etc - 14 - which include women, children, older person, persons with disabilities and minorities , however, there is no report available on the actual efforts made during the last six months .

[45] A National Gender and Child cell fram ework was also formulated in 2013 to work towards the disaster preparedness and disaster risk reduction for which again there is no information on its working in the 20 22 floods . Therefore , in line with the policies formulated , it is imperative that the citizens committee s include women, older person s and persons with dis abilities so that the required response is ensured and provided and that the Policy Guidelines formulated be implemented real time.

[46] In this context, we note that the affected areas require maternity and healthcare for women so there is a n increase d need for female doctors, trainers a nd caretakers to attend to the health concerns . Women are often subjected to gender -based violence and harassment in times of such calamities, therefore safety and security concerns are also of significance for which appropriate response is also required .

[47] In this context , although the framework exists , an effort must go into ensuring that it actually functions and fulfils its mandate. Accordingly, we find that the citizens committee should ensure the representation of the vulnerable groups , particularly of women , in order to strengthen its perspective . 11.

[48] In view of the aforesaid, the impugned orders are modified to the extent that the citizens committee shall no more be headed by a Civil Judge notified by the District Judge concerned and the citizens committee shall no more work under CP No.943 -K/2022, etc 16 Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. - I have read the judgment authored by my learned colleague , Mrs.

[49] Justice Ayesha A. Malik and I am in complete agreement wi th the same. However, I would be remiss if the dimension of climate change is not highlighted in the backdrop of the recent floods. Climate change is undoubtedly the most serious existential threat f aced by Pakistan and the major cause of the recent floods.

[50] Therefore, any post-floods strategy must first and foremost propose a national strategy to deal with climate change today and tomorrow . The primary responsibility falls on the shoulders of the Ministry of Climate Change, Government of Pakistan , as well as , the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) to propose a national adaptation plan to avert the horrific devastation caused by floods this year and also to safeguard and protect the fundamental rights of the people from the wrath of climate change.

[51] I, therefore, feel compelled to append this additional note in public and national interest. 2. Pakistan was ranked in the top 10 most vulnerable countries on the “Global Climate Risk Index 2021”1 and the devastation caused by the rec ent floods in 2022 is distressing proof of the same . Researc h has found that the 5 -day maximum rainfall over Sindh and Balochistan (Provinces of Pakistan) had become 75% more intense tha n it would have been had the climate not warmed by 1.2º C, thereby directly connecting global warming to be a major cause of the recent floods of 2022 and the likelihood of its recurrence in the years to come2.

[52] The probability of such heatwaves has now substantially increased due to climate change, with future heatwaves being even more hotter compare d to 20223, therefore, chances of similar extreme rain fall have also become more likely . According to the “Pakistan Floods 2022 Post -Disaster Needs Assessment” prepared by the Ministry of Planning Development and Special Initiatives, Government of Pakis tan with the assistance of other international bodies such as the World Bank etc., the total damage from the floods is evaluated to be at PKR 3.2 trillion (US$14.9 billion), total loss at PKR 3.3 trillion (US$15.2 billion), and total needs for recovery and reconstruction at PKR 3.5 trillion (US$16.3 billion)4.

[53] The resulting food and health insecurity , the risk of food shortage and diseases pose 1 “Global Climate Risk Index | German Watch”, January 20, 2021 . 2 “Climate change likely increased extreme monsoon rainfall, flooding highly vulnerable communities in Pakistan | World Weather Attribution”, 2022. 3 “Climate Change made devastating early heat in India and Pakistan 30 times more likely | World Weather Attribution”, 2022 4 “Pakistan Floods 2022 Post -Disaster Needs Assessment | Ministry of Planning Development & Special Initiatives” , October, 2022.

[54] CP No.943 -K/2022, etc 17 challenges that need serious and urgent attention5. In view of this unprecedented damage and the likelihood of its recurrence, it is imperative that serious and practical e fforts are undertaken for prevent ion and adaptation against such disasters induced by climate change .

[55] It is also expected that existing policies or mechanisms catering to food insecurity etc. are mobilized as soon as possible and if no such policies or mechanisms exist, then the respective State functionaries should take urgent action to formulate su ch policies and c reate such mechanisms to prevent further exacerbation of the losses and damage already suffered due to the floods and for sustainable rehabilitation . 3.

[56] The existing climate change framework of Pakistan indicates that t he Ministry of Climate Change, Governmen t of Pakistan has formulated a National Climate Change Policy , updated in 2021 , devising policy measures for climate change adaptation and mitigation . Furthermore, t he Climate Change Act of 2017 (“Climate Change Act ”) has established the Pakistan Climate Change Council and the Pakistan Climate Change Authority .

[57] The latter has been empowered to formulate adaptation and mitigation policies, plans etc. , including the National Adaptation Plan, which the former shall approve and monitor. However, it seems that no substantial policies or plans have been formulated or implemented under the Climate Change Act . It is apparent that the measures in place are insufficient to cater to rapidly changing climate and its dire effects , therefore, there is a need for a coordinated joint effort in this regard.

[58] The National Disaster Management Act, 2010 (“Act ”) itself does not expressly cater to climate change , nonetheless , the Act does provide for taking measures for prevention of disasters and mitigation. Section 6(2)(g) of the Act provides that the National Disaster Management Commission (“ Commission ”) may ‘take such other measures for the prevention of disaster or the mitigation or for preparedness … as it may consider necessary’.

[59] Prevention a nd mitigation ha ve also been provided under provisions stipulating powers and functions of the P rovincial Disaster Management Commission , the Provincial Disaster Management Authority and the District Disaster Management Authority established under the Act. Similarly, section 10(3)(a) stipulates that the National Plan shall include ‘measures to be taken for the prevention of disasters or the mitigation of their effects’ and s ection 17(3)(b) of the Act stipulate s that the Provincial Plan shall include “the measures to be adopted for 5 Ibid.

[60] CP No.943 -K/2022, etc 18 prevention and mitigation of disaster s”. Although the National Disaster Management Plan, 2012 does refer to the increase in climate -related natural disasters, however, it falls short of devising any meaningful steps/directions to suggest adaptation measure s to address and guard against the changing climate.

[61] Similarly, one of the policy objectives of the National Disaster Risk Reduction Policy, 2013 include s promoting development planning that considers and addresses risks alongside environmen tal and climate change concerns but there appears to be no plan or strategy on the ground that has been formulated and put out in the public domain that deals with adap tation measure s to be taken by the Government or the respective authorities in order to ensure that the floods of 2022 are not repeated next year.

[62] The rehabilitation work has to be climate resilient and it must be a part of a master adaptation plan. The Pakistan Climate Crises Charter 2022 (“Charter ”) published by the WWF provides a roadmap with the following actions : i. Advocate for loss and damage financing internationally ii. Address institutional governance issues iii.

[63] Develop an effective local government syst em iv. Map climate risks and vulnerabilities v. Prioritize and mainstream local level adaptation vi. Incorporate nature -based solutions in the development paradigm vii. Address vulnerabilities in disadvantaged communities viii. Mainstream crisis response across local communities ix.

[64] Address population management concerns The said Charter has been prepared in consultation with some of the following :- a) National Disaster Risk Management Fund b) Ministry of Planning, Development and Special Initiatives c) Ministry of Climate Change d) Pakistan Council for Research in Water Resources e) Centre for Disaster Management, University of Management and Technology, Lahore f) Population Council g) International Union for Conservation of Nature (Pakistan) h) World Wide Fund for Nature Pakistan i) Sustainable Dev elopment Policy Institute CP No.943 -K/2022, etc 19 j) International Water Management Institute k) Global Water Partnership l) Pakistan Academy of Sciences m) Sustainable Development Policy Institute n) Global Change Impact Studies Centre Yet there is no policy or directive from the concerned Min istry supporting the said Charter or moving in this direction. 4.

[65] Climate justice was a n important consideration at the recent 27th Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (“ COP27 ”) which concluded with a significant and positive development through the formation of a loss and damage fund for climate -vulnerable developing countries6.

[66] Soon funds will be allocated to countries that have suffered loss and damage due to climate change. It is high time to develop a mechanism for the allocation of these funds and the identification of key adaptation infrastructural projects that will help build national climate resilience, especially against floods in the years to come.

[67] I t is expected that the Ministry of Cl imate Change, Government of Pakistan shall drive this initiative and frame a policy and set up a mechanism to effectively and efficiently utilize such funds . Additionally, under section 11 of the Act, subject to the directions of the Commission , the Nation al Disaster Management Authority (“NDMA ”) is to lay down guidelines for minimum standards of relief to be provided to persons affected by disaster.

[68] The NDMA has formulated guidelines under this provision, such as the NDMA Guideline s for Minimum Ex -Gratia Assistance to the Persons Affected by Natural and Man-Made Disasters, 2016, and State functionaries , while operating under the said guidelines, are expected to promptly formulate a mechanism for provision ing of immediate relief to persons affected by climate -related disasters .

[69] It is therefore essential that these global funds are invested in building national climate resilience so that climate induced disasters can be minimized. Climate Change is a perhaps the most serious threat to the fundamental rights of the people in Pakistan. In order to protect their right to life and above all their right to dignity under Articles 9 and 14 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakista n, 1973 , a climate resilient adaptation plan including a detailed mechanism for utilization of financial support coming to Pakistan from 6 “What you need to know about the COP27 Loss and Damage Fund | UN Environment Programme”, November 29, 2022.

[70] CP No.943 -K/2022, etc 20 the loss and damage fund, is the need of the hour. Having failed to learn from the floods in 2010, as has become appar ent from the magnitude of the destruction caused by the recent floods, it is pivotal that effective steps a re taken to prevent such catastrophes in the future .

[71] I hope the Federal Government will act with speed in this regard because in the words of Greta T hunberg,7 “our house is on fire.” 5. This additional note be placed before the other members of the bench for their perusal. Judge Islamabad, 21st October, 2022. Approved for reporting. Hassan 7 Greta Tintin Eleonora Ernman Thunberg is a Swedish environmental activist who is known for challenging world leaders to take immediate action for climate justice.