Case No: C.P.L.A.962/2016
Case Title: Sheikh Muhammad Muneer v. Mst. Feezan
Subject: Suit for specific performance/Agreement to sell
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa
Judgment Date: 25-02-2021
Upload Date: 09-03-2021
Citations: PLD 2021 SC 538
SC Citations: 2021 SCP 84
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._962_2016%20.pdf

[1] order dated 11.01.2016 passed by the Lahore High Court, Lahore in Regular Second Appeal N o. 104 of 2010 ) Sheikh Muhammad Muneer …Petitioner Versus Mst. Feezan …Respondent For the petitioner s: Mr. Muhammad Munir Pi racha, ASC Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR For the respondent : N.R. Date of hearing: 25.02.2021 ORDER Qazi Faez Isa , J.

[2] The learned Mr. Muni r Piracha submits that the petitioner had filed a suit on 8 March 1999 seeking specific performance of an agreement dated 3 August 1998 through which he had agreed to buy the respondent’s house f or three hundred and fifty thousand rupees , of which an amount of one hundred and fifty thousand rupees was paid , but since the respondent refused to receive the balance sale consideration and to convey the house to the petitioner the suit was filed .

[3] The a greement is shown to be witnessed by three persons, namely, Muhammad Ali , the husband of the respondent, Allah Ditta and Muhammad Nawaz . Civil Petition No. 962 of 2016 2 2. The learned counsel states that Muhammad Ali was not produced as a witness because the petitioner apprehended that he would not admit witness ing the execution of the agreement because he was the respondent ’s husband.

[4] Another witness Allah Ditta was not produced because he could not be found. However, Muhammad Nawaz (PW -8) was produced and so too the scribe of the agreemen t, namely , Muhammad Iqbal (PW7 ). The learned counsel submits that a scribe can be a n attesting witness and in support of his contention refers to Article 79 of the Qanun -e- Shahadat, 19841 (‘Qanun -e-Shahadat ’) and section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act, 18822 (‘Act’).

[5] He says that reading these two provisions together permits a scribe to be an attesting witness . Therefore, since two persons in their testimony had said that the agreement was signed before them the require ment of Article 79 of the Qanun -e-Shahdat had been met and the agreement stood proved . Learned counsel submits that neither the learned Judges of the Subordinate Court s nor the learned Judge of the High Court appreciated this point and dismissed the petitioner’s suit by holding that two att esting witnesses of the agreement had not been produced to confirm its execution . 3.

[6] To appreciate t he learned counsel ’s point it would be appropriate to reproduce here under the cited prov isions : Article 7 9 of the Qanun -e-Shahadat , 1984 : 79. Proof of execut ion of document required by law to be attested . If a document is required by law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence until two attesting witnesses at least have been called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there be two attesting wi tnesses alive, and subject to the process of the Court and capable of given Evidence : Provided that it shall not be necessary to call an attesting witness in proof of the execution of any document, not being a will, which has been registered in accordance with the provisions of the Registration Act, 1908 (XVI of 1908), unless its execution by the person by whom it purports to have been executed is specifically denied. 1 President’s Order No. 10 of 1984 promulgated on 28 October 1984. 2 Act IV of 1882, enacted on 17 February 1882.

[7] Civil Petition No. 962 of 2016 3 Section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 : 3. Interpretation clause . “attested” , in relation to an instrument, means and shall be deemed always to have meant attested by two or more witnesses each of whom has seen the executant sign or affix his mark to the instrument, or has seen some other person sign the instrument in the presence a nd by the direction of the executant , or has received from the executant a personal acknowledgment of his signature of mark or of the signature of such other person, and each of whom has signed the instrument in the presence of the executant; but it shall not be necessary that more than one of such witnesses shall have been present at the same time, and no particular form of attestation shall be necessary. 4.

[8] The respondent -defendant denied the execution of the agreement and denied agreeing to sell her ho use. Therefore, the said agreement was required to be proved as mandated by Article 79 of the Qanun -e-Shahadat. If precedent is required for this trite contention reference may be made to the decision in the case of Nazir Ahmed v Muzaffar Hussain3 which held, that: … in case of denial of execution of document, the party relying on such document must prove its execution in accordance with the modes of proof as laid down in Qanun -e-Shahadat Order, 1984 and the party is required to observe rule of productio n of best evidence.4 The aforesaid was also stated in the case of Maqsood Ahmad v Salman Ali .5 5.

[9] The learned counsel says that the scribe who wrote the agreement was an attesting witness of its execution . A scribe may be an attesting witness provided the agreement itself mention s/nominate s him as such . The agreement mention ed three attesting witnesses by name and the scribe (Muhammad Iqbal) was not one of them .

[10] In the case of Tassaduq Hussain v Muhammad 3 2008 SCMR 1639. 4 Ibid, p. 1642. 5 PLD 2003 Supreme Court 31, para 9, p. 35 -36. Civil Petition No. 962 of 2016 4 Din6 this Court had held that a scribe is not an att esting witness in terms of Articles 17 and 79 of the Qanun -e-Shahadat: Therefore, in my considered view a scribe of a document can only be a competent witness in terms of Article 17 and 79 of the Qanun -e-Shahadat Order, 1984 if he has fixed his signature a s an attesting witness of the document and not otherwise; his signing the document in the capacity of a writer does not fulfill and meet the mandatory requirement of attestation by him separately, however, he may be examined by the concerned party for the corroboration of the evidence of the marginal witnesses, or in the eventuality those are conceived by Article 79 itself not as a substitute.7 To state that the scribe (Muhammad Iqbal) was an attesting witness is contrary to the contents of the said agreem ent. 6.

[11] Oral evidence in contradiction of the contents of a document cannot be led as stated by Article 70 of the Qanun -e-Shahadat , which is reproduced hereunder: 70. Proof of facts by oral evidence . All facts, except the contents of documents, may be prove d by oral evidence. However, o ral evidence to the contents of a document may be lead in certain limited cases and then strict compliance is required to made with Article 35 of the Qanun -Shahadat , reproduced hereunder : 35.

[12] When oral admissions as to conten ts of documents are relevant . Oral admissions as to the contents of a document are not relevant , unless and until the party proposing to prove them shows that he is entitled to give secondary evidence of the contents of such document under the rules herein after contained, or unless the genuineness of a document produced is in question.

[13] Permission was not sought , let alone given , to lead secondary evidence. Therefore, evidence contrary to the contents of the said agreement could not be led; the said agreeme nt had to be proved by producing two attesting witnesses . However , only one out of three attesting witness es was produced. 6 PLD 2011 Supreme Court 241. 7 Ibid, p. 249E.

[14] Civil Petition No. 962 of 2016 5 7. The question of the requisite number of witnesses to prove the execution of a document and the role of a scribe may also be consi dered from the perspective of Article 17 of the Qanun -e- Shahadat , which is reproduced hereunder : Competence and number of witnesses . (1) The competence of a person to testify, and the number of witnesses required in any case shall be determined in accordan ce with the injunctions of Isl am as laid down in the Holy Qur’ an and Sunnah: (2) Unless otherwise provided in any law relating to the enforcement of Hudood or any other special law , - (a) in matters pertaining to financial or future obligations, if reduc ed to writing, the instrument shall be attested by two men or one man and two women, so that one may remind the other, if necessary, and evidence shall be led accordingly; and (b) in all other matters, the Court may accept, or act on the testimony of one man or one woman or such other evidence as the circumstances of the case may warrant. 8.

[15] The agreement was with a lady ( the respondent) and under the agreement a certain amount was stated to have already been paid and the remainder was to be paid in the fut ure and she was supposed to convey and deliver possession of her house to the petitioner upon receipt of the balance payment. Therefore, the agreement was in respect of ‘ matters pertaining to financial or future obligations ’ in terms of Article 17 (2)(a) of the Qanun -e-Shahadat and require d that such an agreement to be attested ‘ by two men, or one man and two women, so that one may remind the other ’.

[16] However, only one attesting witness was produced. For proving a document Article 17(1) of the Qanun -e-Shahad at states that, ‘ The competence of a person to testify, and the number of witnesses required in any case shall be determined in accordance with the injunctions of Islam as laid down in the Holy Quran and Sunnah .’ Therefore, we turn to the Hol y Qur’an to seek guidance .

[17] Civil Petition No. 962 of 2016 6 9. Verse 282 of the second chapter , Al-Baqar ah, of the Holy Qur’an comprehensively deals with agreements , including the kind under consideration : O ye who believe! when y ou deal with each other, in transactions involving future obligations in a fixed period of time, reduce them to writing.

[18] Let a scribe (katib un) write down faithfully as between the parties: let not the scribe refuse to write: as Allah has taught him, so let him write. Let him who incurs the liability dictate, but let him fear his Lord Allah. And not diminish aught of what he owes. If the party liable is mentally deficient, or weak, or unable himself to dictate, let his guardian dictate faithfully.

[19] And get two witnesses , out of your own men, and if there are not two men, then a man and two women, such as ye choose, for witnesses , so that if one of them errs, the other can remind her. The witnesses should not refuse when they are called on (for evidence). Disdain not to reduce to writing (your contract) for a future period, whether i t be small or big: it is more just in the sight of Allah, more suitable as evidence and more convenient to prevent doubts among yourselves.

[20] But if it be a transaction which y ou carry out on the spot among yourselves, there is no blame on you if y ou reduce it not to writing. But take witnesses whenever you make a commercial contract; and let neither scribe nor witness suffer harm. If y ou do (such harm), it would be wickedness in you. So fear Allah; for it is Allah that teaches you.

[21] And Allah is well acquaint ed with all things. [the words scribe and witness/es have been highlighted] The Holy Qur’an requires that the number of witnesses should be not less than two me n or a man and two women (so that the one may remind the other if she forgets) . However, in the present case only one attesting witness was produced .

[22] Therefore, compliance was also not made with Article 17(1) and (2) of the Qanun -e- Shahadat and with the injunctions of Islam. 10. The translator and exegete Abdullah Yusuf Ali explaining the above verse writes the following under his translation of it: Commercial morality is here taught on the highest plane and yet in the most practical manner, both as regards the bargains to be made, the evidence to be provided, the doubts to be avoided, and the duties and rights of scribes and witnesses.

[23] Probity even in worldly matters is to be, not a mere matter of convenience or policy, but a matter of conscience and religious duty. Civil Petition No. 962 of 2016 7 Even our everyday transactions are to be carried out as in the presence of Allah.8 11. Radical awakening was brought about by the Holy Qur’an and hitherto before unfamiliar women’s right s were established for the first time in scripture .

[24] A woman’s right to own and dispose of her property; her right to retain, both before and after her marria ge, her income and property; h er ability to do business without permission of her father or husband and keep and spend what she earns. ‘ Men shall have the benefit of what they earn and women shall have the benefit of what they earn .’9 Her entitlement to inherit from her parents and husband is also precisely ordained in the fourth chapter ( an-Nisa) of the Holy Qur’an .10 A woman also does not need permission to acquire or dispose of property; what she inherits is hers and hers alone; neither her husband, fath er, brother or son has any entitlement to it; ‘ Do not eat up (consume) one another’s property ’.11 The bridal gifts given at the time of marriage are the wife’s property, and remains hers .

[25] They can be added to but not taken away .12 It is also recommended that husbands make wills to provide for their wives .13 Her right to enter into contracts and to witness contracts14 the Holy Qur’an mention s in great detail . In this case the respondent lady denied having entered into the said agreement which the petitioner, an attesting witness and the scribe testified that she had, however, her solitary testimony was to be accepted because this is what the law and the injunctions of the Holy Qur’an mandate. 12.

[26] It is of concern that in the Islamic Republic of Pakistan Qur’anic in junctions are at times relegated in favour of retrogressive practices ; we ha ve criticized this in the case of Fawad Ishaq v Mehreen Mansoor .15 We noted that, ‘ A chasm existed 8 Note 333, The Holy Qur’a n, Translation & Commentary , 1934. 9 An-Nisa (4) verse 32. 10 Ibid, vers es 7, 11 and 12. 11 Ibid, verse 29. 12 An-Nisa (4) verses 24 and 25 , Al-Maidah (5) verse 5 and Al-Mumtahanah (60) verse 10 . 13 Al-Baqarah (2) verse 240. 14 Al-Baqarah (2) verse 282. 15 PLD 2020 Supreme Court 269.

[27] Civil Petition No. 962 of 2016 8 between a woman’s position in Islam to that which prevailed till a century ago in Europe and America where upon marriage a wife stood deprived of her property, which became that of her husband to do with it as he pleased. ’16 It may be useful to reproduce the following thr ee paragraphs from the judgement as well : 10.

[28] We however find th at the old European and American concepts at times permeate into the thinking even of judges in Pakistan. The doctrine of ‘coverture’ subsumed a married woman’s identity. Sir William Blackstone described the doctrine of coverture: “By marriage, the husband and wife are one person in law: that is, the very being or legal existence of the woman is suspended during the marriage, or at least is incorporated and consolidated into that of the husband: under whose wing, protection, and cover, she performs everythi ng; and is therefore called in our law -French a feme covert…”.

[29] In her comprehensively researched boo k Amy Louise Erickson writes, “Under common law a woman’s legal identity during marriage was eclipsed - literally covered - by her husband. As a ‘feme cover t’, she could not contract, neither could she sue nor be sued independently of her husband. … The property a woman brought to marriage – her dowry or portion – all came under the immediate control of her husband” .

[30] It was only on the passing of the Married Women’s Property Act, 1882 that in England a married woman became, “capable of acquiring, holding, and disposing by will or otherwise, of any real or personal property as her separate property, in the same manner as if she were a feme sole, without the int ervention of any trustee” . 11.

[31] The situation in the United States of America of married women was no better, they had no legal existence apart from their husbands. The reason for a married woman’s servile status was sought to be explained by the Supreme C ourt of Illinois, “It is simply impossible that a married woman should be able to control and enjoy her property as if she were sole, without practically leaving her at liberty to annul the marriage”.

[32] The unjustness of the laws was severely criticized. Elizabeth Cady Stanton listed in the Declaration of Sentiments “the injuries and usurpations on the part of man toward woman” – “He has made her, if married, in the eye of the law, civilly dead. He has taken from her all right in property, even to the wages she earns… the law, in all cases, going upon a false supposition of the supremacy of a man, and giving all 16 Ibid, para 15, p. 280.

[33] Civil Petition No. 962 of 2016 9 power into his hands”. Harriet Beecher Stowe was another campaigner for women’s rights, observing that, “[T]he position of a married woman… is, in man y respects, precisely similar to that of the negro slave. She can make no contract and hold no property; whatever she inherits or earns becomes at that moment the property of her husband. … [I]n English common law a married woman is nothing at all.

[34] She pas ses out of legal existence.” 12. Discrimination against women pervaded in other areas too. It was only in 1960 that women in America could open bank accounts without their husband’s permission and this right was acquired by women in the United Kingdom as late as 1975. The professions were also barred to women.

[35] Mrs. Myra Colby Bradwell had passed the bar examinations but was not allowed to practice law; she asserted her right to practice but in 1873 the United States Supreme Court held, that denying Mrs. B radwell the right to practice law violated no provision of the federal Constitution and added, “That God designed the sexes to occupy different spheres of action, and that it belonged to men to make, apply, and execute the laws, was regarded as an almost axiomatic truth”. 13.

[36] The learned Mr. Piracha says that prudence dictated that the petitioner should not produce or summon Muhammad Ali , who was an attesting witness, because he was the husband of the respondent and it was apprehended that he will deny witne ssing his wife signing the said agreement . Merely because a witness is related to either party does mean he/she stops being a witness nor that he/she should not be produced/summoned as a witness .

[37] The above quoted verse of the Holy Qur’an s tates that it is the religious duty of a Muslim to come forward to test ify when called upon to do so - ‘The witnesses should not refuse when they are called on ’ (for evidence). An attest ing witness remains a witness irrespective of his or her relationship to the parties to an agreement.

[38] I f a witness does not agree to testify he/she can be summoned through the court . In the present case two attesting witnesses namely , Muhammad Ali and Muhammad Nawaz , were not produced nor compelled to give evidence by being summoned through the court . Civil Petition No. 962 of 2016 10 14. As regards the scribe he was not shown or described as a witness in the said agreement , therefore, he could not be categorised as an attesting witness .

[39] The cited verse of the Holy Qur’an mentions three times the word scribe (katib ) and five tim es the witness /es (shahi d) but does not use these words interchangeably , instead separately and distinct ively. Therefore, a scribe and a witness cannot be the same. In Tassaduq Hussain v Muhammad Din17 this Court considered Article 17 of the Qanun -e- Shahad at and held, that: 7. … the provisions of Article 17(2)(a) encompasses in its scope twofold objects (i) regarding the validity of the instruments, meaning thereby, that if it is not attested by the required number of witnesses the instrument shall be inval id and therefore if not admitted by the executant or otherwise contested by him, it shall not be enforceable in law (ii) it is relatable to the proof of such instruments in term of mandatory spirit of Article 79 of The Order, 1984 when it is read with the later.

[40] Because the said Article in very clear terms prescribes “If a document is required by law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence until two attesting witnesses at least have been called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there be two attesting witnesses alive and subject to the process of the Court and capable of giving evidence”.18 8.

[41] The command of the Article 79 is vividly discernible which elucidates that in order to prove an instrument which by law is required to be attested, it has to be proved by two attesting witness, if they are alive and otherwise are not incapacitated and are subject to the process of the Court and capable of giving evidence.

[42] The powerful expression “shall not be used as evidence” until the requisite numb er of attesting witnesses have been examined to prove its execution is couched in the negative, which depicts the clear and unquestionable intention of the legislature, barring and placing a complete prohibition for using in evidence any such document, whi ch is either not attested as mandated by the law and/or if the required number of attesting witnesses are not produced to prove it.

[43] As the consequence of the failure in this behalf are provided by the Article itself, therefore, it is a mandatory provision of law and should be given due effect by the Courts in letter and spirit. The provisions of this Article are most uncompromising, so long as 17 Op. cit. 18 Ibid, p. 247. Civil Petition No. 962 of 2016 11 there is an attesting witness alive capable of giving evidence and subject to the process of the Court, no document which is required by law to be attested can be used in evidence until such witness has been called, the omission to call the requisite number of attesting witnesses is fatal to the admissibility of the document. … And for the purpose of proof of such a do cument, the attesting witnesses have to be compulsorily examined as per the requirement of Article 79, otherwise, it shall not be considered and taken as proved and used in evidence.

[44] This is in line with the principle that where the law requires an act to be done in a particular manner, it has to be done in that way and not otherwise.19 [emphasis has been added] 9. Coming to the proposition canvassed by the counsel for the appellant that a scribe of the document can be a substitute for the attesting witnes ses … It may be held that if such witness is allowed to be considered as the attesting witness it shall be against the very concept, the purpose, object and the mandatory command of the law highlighted above.20 And, in an earlier case , Nazir Ahmad v Muzaf far Hussain ,21 it was held, that: Article 17(2)(a) of the Qanun -e-Shahadat Order, 1984, provides that “in matters pertaining to financial or future obligations, if reduced to writing, the instrument shall be attested by two men, or one man and two women, so that one may remind the other, if necessary and evidence shall be led accordingly”.’ 15.

[45] The petitioner presumably was not able to locate a witness (Allah Ditta) . The burden to produce or summon him lay upon the petitioner, which is not alleviated merely by saying he could not be found. Article 80 of the Qanun -e-Shahadat provides, that: 80. Proof where no attesting witness found . If no such attesting witness can be found, it must be proved that the witnesses have either died or cannot be found and that the do cument was executed by the person who purports to have done so.

[46] The Article states that it must be proved that the witness had either died or could not be found . Simply alleging that a witness cannot 19 Ibid, p. 248. 20 Ibid, p. 248. 21 Op cit. Civil Petition No. 962 of 2016 12 be found did not a ssuage the burden to locate and produ ce him. The petitioner did not lead evidence either to establish his death or disappearance, let alone seek permission to lead secondary evidence. 16.

[47] Therefore, for the reasons mentioned above we are of the considered opinion that the learned Judge of the High Court and the learned Judges of the Subordinate Courts correct ly dismiss ed the petitioner ’s suit as the petitioner had failed to establish that the said agreement had been executed by the respondent and/ or that she had agreed to sell her house to the petitioner.

[48] Consequently, l eave to appeal is declined and this petition is dismissed. Judge Judge Islamabad , 25 February 2021 . Arif Approved for reporting .