Case No: C.P.L.A.946/2022
Case Title: Syed Ghazanfar Ali Shah v. Hassan Bukhari and others
Subject: Writ Petition/.
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa
Judgment Date: 13-11-2023
Upload Date: 16-11-2023
Citations: 2024 SCMR 154
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 351
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._946_2022.pdf

[1] order dated 21.12.2021 of the Lahore High Court, Rawalpindi Bench passed in Writ Petition No.1325 of 2016) Syed Ghazanfar Ali Shah …Petitioner s Versus Hassan Bokhari and others …Respondents For the petitioner s: Mr. Amjad Raza Bhatti, ASC with Syed Zeeshan Haider, son of the petitioner No.1 For the respo ndents: Not represented.

[2] Date of hearing: 13.11.2023 ORDER Qazi Faez Isa, CJ . Learned counsel states that the respondents, who are one hundred and twelve in number, ha d submitted an application under section 135 of the Punjab Land Revenue Act , 1967 seeking partitioning of certain land s. The application was objected to by the petitioners, who are two in number.

[3] The matter eventually came up before the Member , Board of Revenue, who disposed of the same by consent . However, the petitioners assail ed the consent order by filing a writ petition before the High Court . The learned Judge of the High Court reproduced the earlier consent and dismissed the writ petition and held that , ‘the petition at the face of it is not only frivolous but vexatious and is dismissed in limine with costs of Rs.50,000/ -, which shall be deposited with the Deputy Registrar (Judicial) of this Court within thirty days, failing which the same shall be recovered from the petitioners as arrears of land revenue in accordance with l aw.’ We inquired whether the costs which w ere imposed had been paid or recovered , and are informed that the costs were neither paid nor recovered.

[4] The impugned order of the High Court is dated 21 December 2021 and thus, such an anomaly is surprising. The office shall have pointed this out and noted it. 2. We enquired from the learned counsel why partition is being objected to and he stated that the petitioners are in possession of land and their rights will be adversely effected.

[5] This is no t a valid groun d to oppose partition . Moreover, the petitioners had challenged a consent order , which was upheld by the High Court. The respondent s had CP-946 of 2022.doc 2 submitted a simple application for partition , which they were entitled under the law, but which for no discernable reas on has been resisted by the petitioners.

[6] This has resulted in unnecessary litigation and wastage of time. The petitioners, it seems, want to procrastinate matter s and by acting most unreasonably have managed to stretch out a simple matter for almost 14 yea rs. The petitioners must be influential and do not want the less fortunate overwhelming majority to obtain their rights pursuant to the partition. 3.

[7] The fact that revenue authorities have still not attended to the respondents’ application and have disrega rded the order of the Member, Board of Revenue, indicates the influence they wield , including over the revenue officers of the area , who have also paid no heed to the order of the learned Judge of the High Court .

[8] They also did not bother to recover the amo unt of fifty thousand rupees that they had been directed to do in the impugned judgment. Such disobedience and disdain by the revenue officers who are paid out of the public exchequer undermines the rule of law. 4. No illegality has been pointed out in th e impugned order to justify the grant of leave , which is accordingly declined with costs in the sum of one million rupees ; such costs are in addition to the costs imposed by the learned Judge of the High Court.

[9] The costs shall be deposited with the concer ned revenue officer and shall be equally distributed/ paid to the respondents, and if not deposited within 30 days, shall be recovered as areas of land revenue f rom the petitioners . The concerned revenue officers are also directed to implement the orde r of the Member, Board of Revenue in accordance with the law.

[10] Copy of this order be sent to the Senior Member, Board of Revenue, Government of Punjab and to the senior most revenue officer of the concerned district , who shall proceed as directed . 5. The p etition stands dismissed in the foregoing terms. Chief Justice Judge Judge Islamabad 3.11.2023 M. Azhar Malik/* Approved for reporting.