Case No: C.P.77/2011
Case Title: Watan Party through its President Hashim Shaukat Khan and another v. Federation of Pakistan and others
Subject: U/A 184(3)
Judge: Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry
Judgment Date: 12-06-2012
Upload Date: 12-06-2012
Citations: PLD 2012 SC 292
SC Citations: 2012 SCP 41
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Const.P.77to85,89and92of2011[dt12.6.2012].pdf

[1] order an independent inquiry into the allegations that Pak istan harbored and offered assistance to UBL and other senior Qaeda operatives. The White House can suggest names of independent investigators to CONST P 77 - , etc. 4 populate the panel, along the lines of the bipartisan 9 -11 Commission, for example. 2.

[2] The inquiry will be ac countable and independent, and result in findings of tangible value to the US government and the American people that identify with exacting detail those elements responsible for harboring and aiding UBL inside and close to the inner ring of influence in P akistan’s Government (civilian, intelligence directorates and military).

[3] It is certain that the UBL Commission will result in immediate termination of active service officers in the appropriate government offices and agencies found responsible for complici ty in assisting UBL. 3. The new national security team will implement a policy of either handing over those left in the leadership of Al Qaeda or other affiliated terrorist groups who are still on Pakistani soil, including Ayman Al Zawahiri, Mullah Omar a nd Sirajuddin Haqqani, or giving US military forces a “green light” to conduct the necessary operations to capture or kill them on Pakistani soil.

[4] This “carte blanche” guarantee is not without political risks, but should demonstrate the new group’s commitm ent to rooting out bad elements on our soil. This commitment has the backing of the top echelon on the civilian side of our house, and we will insure necessary collateral support. 4. One of the great fears of the military -intelligence establishment is tha t with your stealth capabilities to enter and exit Pakistani airspace at will, Pakistan’s nuclear assets are now legitimate targets.

[5] The new national security team is prepared, with full backing of the Pakistani government – initially civilian but eventual ly all three power centers – to develop an acceptable framework of discipline for the nuclear program. This effort was begun under the previous military regime, with acceptable results.

[6] We are prepared to reactivate those ideas and build on them in a way t hat brings Pakistan’s nuclear assets under a more verifiable, transparent regime. 5. The new national security team will eliminate Section S of the ISI charged with maintaining relations to the Taliban, Haqqani network, etc. This will dramatically improve relations with Afghanistan. 6.

[7] We are prepared to cooperate fully under the new national security team’s guidance with the Indian government on bringing all perpetrators of Pakistani origin to account for the 2008 Mumbai attacks, whether outside governme nt or inside any part of the government, including its intelligence agencies.

[8] This includes handing over those against whom sufficient evidence exists of guilt to the Indian security services. Pakistan faces a decision point of unprecedented importance. We, who believe in democratic governance and building a much better structural relationship in the region with India AND Afghanistan, seek US assistance to help us pigeon -hole the forces lined up against your interests and ours, including containment of ce rtain elements inside our country that require appropriate re -sets and re -tasking in terms of direction and extent of responsibility after the UBL affair.

[9] We submit this memorandum for your consideration collectively as the members of the new national sec urity team who will be inducted by the President of Pakistan with your support in this undertaking. ” CONST P 77 - , etc. 5 2. It is significant to note that the issue of confidential memo randum was highlighted after 21st November, 2011.

[10] In the meanwhile, the then Ambassado r of Pakistan to the US A, was summoned who tendered his resignation as per undisputed report s aired on electronic media . It may not be out of context to observe here that as per media reports , the ISI had also collected SMS messages exchanged between the f ormer Ambassador of Pakistan and Mr.

[11] Mansoor Ijaz, extracts of which have been incorporated in the petitions. 3. It is to be noted that not only in the publication of the ‘Financial Times’ of 10th October, 2011, but subsequent thereto, material was publ ished in the print media on behalf of Mr. Mansoor Ijaz, who emphasized that “Mr. Mullen insisted on having the Ambassador’s offer s to be put in writing because the US Government had been repeatedly deceived by Pakistan’s verbal offers of action in the rece nt past. ” “He also insisted that I obtain the Ambassador’s assurance that President Zardari had approved the offers contained in the memo randum.

[12] I did exactly those two things ,” he told The News. Speaking after Admiral Mullen confirmed the Memo, Mansoor sa id at 09:06:16 hours, “I spoke to Amb Haqqani at his London hotel (Park Lane Intercontinental Room 430) in a call lasting 11:16 minutes.” “During this call, he confessed that the final text of the memo was OK and that he had ‘the boss’ approval ’ that the m emorandum could be sent to Admiral Mullen.

[13] The boss was an obvious reference to President Zardari,” Mansoor insisted. ” 4. We note that exchange of messages has also been admitted as is reported in the UK Financial Times of 10th October, 2011. The Federa l Interior Minister Mr. Rahman Malik had, however, CONST P 77 - , etc. 6 admitted that Mr.

[14] Hussain Haqqani was involved in communication of voice/text message s with an American national, but there was no written letter, either from the Presidency or from any other agency of the Government. Mr. Malik is reported to have said that no doubt Mr. Haqqani was a close aide of the President, but this communication through SMS (text message) was between two individuals – one American national and the second was our Ambassador. 5.

[15] The material available was exchange of SMS messages and blackberry messages and we have to examine as to who had initiated these messages. It is clear that the matter is open for investigation. 6. All the petitioners were asked their opinion as to the objec ts and purposes for which the confidential memorandum in question attributed to the then Ambassador of Pakistan was sent to the US Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff by handing it over to James John and also utilizing the services of a businessman Mansoor Ija z, particularly in the wake of the incident of Abbottabad of 2nd May, 2011.

[16] According to them, if the allegations contained hereinabove are established, then the culprits whosoever are involved , should be held liable for action and a Commission be constitu ted to probe into the memorandum scandal. Whereas the learned Attorney General for Pakistan stated that he is not against the probe, but as the matter is pending before the Parliamentary Committee on National Security, therefore, we should wait for the res ult of the Committee’s proceedings.

[17] In our opinion, both the forums are not against probe into the matter and subject to constitutionality of the Committee, proceeding can be taken up simultaneously. 7. It may be observed that under Article 5 of the Constitution, it is the basic duty of every citizen to be loyal to the CONST P 77 - , etc. 7 State and to be obedient to the Constitution and law, being inviolable obligation wherever he may be and of every other person for the time being within Pakistan. 8.

[18] The memo randum , issuance where of, prima facie, seems to be establis hed, has posed immediately two questions – one with regard to civil/constitutional liability with its consequences as envisaged by Article 6 of the Constitution, and the second, the criminal liability as well . We are conscious of the fact that the respondents who include the President of Pakistan, the Army Chief, ISI, etc., have to file their replies to explain their position.

[19] However, we may , at this stage, refer to the case of United States v. Richard M. Nix on, President of the United States [418 US 683] wherein the then President of the United States was facing proceedings before the Committee of the Senate, and at the same time, pretrial evidence was being collected by a special prosecutor general , which wa s objected to by him and the matter went up to the US Supreme Court and ultimately it was resolved that such pretrial evidence could be collected.

[20] Similarly, there are so many other cases, including the case of Imtiaz Ahmad v. Government of Pakistan (1994 SC 2142) wherein collection of pretrial evidence against persons who are found guilty ultimately is not prohibited. 9. We are told that the Prime Minister of Pakistan has also announced that the Parliamentary Committee on National Security will probe int o the matter.

[21] We do not know the mandate of the Committee. However, we have been informed that as far as this Committee is concerned, it has no constitutional backing, i.e. it has not been constituted under any provision of the Constitution. Be that as it may, if any incriminating evidence is collected by the Committee both for CONST P 77 - , etc. 8 civil and criminal action by probing into the matter, we would welcome the same.

[22] During the pendency of the proceedings, we would appreciate if the outcome of the proposed inquiry by the Committee is shared with us, if possible. Similarly, if the local Commission, which we are contemplating to constitute, succeeds in collecting forensic or other physical evidence , we would also be sharing the same with the Parliamentary Committee beca use the object and purpose both of the Parliament and of this Court is that there should not be any compromise on the sovereignty, security and independence of the country. 10.

[23] The petitioners , however, undoubtedly had to discharge their burden while arguing their cases with regard to the remedy, which they have invoked under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, however, it is consider ed appropriate that in the meantime, the respondents may file their replies to all the petitions within 15 days of the pas sing of this order.

[24] To protect and preserve the evidence , we would like to appoint a Commission comprising a competent officer for the purpose of collecting evidence on the issues, which have been highlighted hereinabove, including the question of authenti city of the memo randum , and the circumstances under which it was sent and the object behind addressing such memo randum to the high ups of a foreign country, and whether such an act is tantamount to compromising the sovereignty, security and independence of Pakistan . 11.

[25] The Registrar of the Court is directed to address a letter on behalf of the Court to Mr. Tariq Khosa, a former PSP officer, who had worked as Secretary Norcotics, DG, FIA as well as Inspector General/PPO, Balochistan to obtain his consent whether he agrees to perform this national duty. On receipt of his consent, the matter shall CONST P 77 - , etc. 9 be handed over to him.

[26] The Commission shall be entitled to the remuneration, TA/DA and other perks, which Mr. Tariq Khosa was receiving at the time of his retirem ent. If need be, Mr. Tariq Khosa may travel outside Pakistan for the purposes of collecting evidence as this Court had allowed such practice in the case of Benazir Bhutto v.

[27] State (PLD 1999 SC 937). As far as the expenditures of the Commission are concerne d, those shall be borne by the Foreign Affairs, Interior, Cabinet and Defence Divisions. 12. In the meanwhile, we direct that all the concerned authorities of the Federal and the Provincial Government s shall extend their full cooperation to Mr.

[28] Tariq Kh osa in collecting evidence. He would be free to associate with him any other sitting and/or retired officer of the police or any other technical person to collect evidence. He would be holding the probe in the Cabinet Division. The Cabinet Secretary shall provide him all logistic support for the purpose of performing the function on behalf of the Court.

[29] He is required to complete this task as early as possible, preferably within a period of three weeks from the receipt of this order. It is to be noted that in case Mr. Tariq Khosa declines to act as the Commission, he may inform the Registrar who shall place the matter in Chambers for passing of appropriate order for taking up the matter either in the Court or holding proceedings in the Chambers. 13.

[30] We may also observe here that no sooner the issue of memo randum came to limelight , the former Ambassador of Pakistan tendered his resignation. We do not want to attribute to him anything adverse about his involvement and he is entitled to due respect. But , we d esire that he should fully cooperate with the Commission and during the pendency of the cases before this Court, he would not be CONST P 77 - , etc. 10 leaving the country without prior permission of this Court.

[31] This order should be communicated to the Secretaries of the Ministr ies of Interior and Foreign Affairs with the direction that if Mr. Hussain Haqqani violates the terms of this order and goes abroad, they shall be held personally responsible. At this juncture, we would expect from all the foreign agencies that they will e xtend full cooperation to the Commission as it is an issue of utmost importance for the sovereignty, security and independence of the country. 14.

[32] Adjourned to a date in office. Sd/- IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ Sd/- Sd/- MIAN SHAKIRULLAH JAN , J. TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI , J. Sd/- Sd/- JAWWAD S. KHAWAJA, J. TARIQ PARVEZ, J. Sd/- Sd/- MAIN SAQIB NISAR, J. AMIR HANI MUSLIM , J. Sd/- Sd/- EJAZ AFZAL KHAN , J. IJAZ AHMED CHAUDHRY , J. Islamabad, the 1st December , 2011 APPROVED FOR REPORTING