Case No: C.P.L.A.2933/2019
Case Title: Dr. Muhammad Amin v. Zarai Taraqiati Bank Ltd thr. Board of Director, Islamabad & others
Subject: Writ Petition/Service
Judge: Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar
Judgment Date: 10-08-2022
Upload Date: 17-04-2023
Citations: 2023 SCMR 1083
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 116
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._2933_2019.pdf

[1] Judgment dated 29.05.2019 passed by the Islamabad High Court, Islamabad in W.P. No. ) Dr. Muhammad Amin ….Petitioner VERSUS Zarai Taraqiati Bank Limited through Board of Director, ZTBL, HO, Islamabad and others …Respondents For the Petitioner : Petitioner in person For the Respondents: N.R. Date of Hearing: 10.08.2022 JUDGMENT MUHAMMAD ALI MAZHAR , J:- This Civil Petition for leave to appeal is directed against the judgment dated 29.05.2019 passed by the learned Islamabad High Court in W.P.No.1057 of 201 8, whereby the Writ P etition was dismissed with certain observation s.

[2] In fac t, the petitioner had challenged in the aforesaid Writ Petition, the Office Memorandum dated 7.3.2018 , whereby his departmental appeal was dismissed. 2. By means of an Office Memorandum dated 15.04 .2016 , the major penalty of dismissal from service was imposed upon the petitioner by the Respondent No.1 .

[3] Against the dismissal, the petitioner had filed a departmental appeal , but the same was also rejected on 07.03.2018. The record reflects that on 02.03.2016 , the petitioner was i ssued a charge sheet with a statement of allegation s of unauthorized absence from duty on numerous dates between July, 2015 and March , 2016.

[4] It was further alleged in the C.P. -2- statement of a llegation s that the petitioner had also tampered the attendance register and marked the attendance on the crossed columns with effect from 4.7.2015 to 4.9.2015 and also left the station unauthorizedly without prior permissio n or approval of the Competent A uthority. 3.

[5] The inquiry proceeding s were conducted under the Zarai Taraqiati B ank Limited Officers Service (Efficiency and D iscipline) Regulation s, 1975 (“1975 E&D Regulations ”) and the inquiry report was submitted on 04.04.2016 . The inquiry officer found the petitioner guilty of misconduct, therefore, o n 05.04. 2016, second show cause notice was issued to the petitioner as to why he should not be dismissed from service .

[6] Ultimately , vide Office Memorandum dated 15.04.2016 , the petitioner was dismissed from service. The impugned judgment of the learned High Court also trac ks the history of litigation instituted by the petitioner against the respondents which shows that at least three Civil Suits for declaration , mandatory and permanent injunction were filed by the petitioner.

[7] In the first suit , he challenged the statement of allegations issued to him along with the show cause notice . In the second suit, he again sought a declaration , mandatory and permanent injunction to the effect that the show cause notice dated 05.04.2016 was without lawful authority and in violation of the 1975 E&D Regulations.

[8] The third suit was also for declaration , mandatory and permanent injunction wherein the petitioner prayed for a declaration to the effect that his dismissal order from service was illegal and prayed for directions to the respondents for the withdrawal of his dismissal order and his reinstatement in service. 4.

[9] The memo of the petition shows that the petitioner only challenge d the Office Memorandum dated 07.03.2018 which was issued by the Appellate Authority of the Respondent No. 1 (Disciplinary Proceeding Department , Investigation Unit -II) whereby the petitioner was informed that his appeal against the dismissal order has been duly considered and while rejecting the appeal, the C.P. -3- dismissal order dated 15.04.2016 was upheld.

[10] The prayer clause in the High Court unequivocally demonstrate s that only t he rejection order of the appeal was under challenge but nothing was alleged with regard to the imposition of the major penalty of dismissal from service while such cause of action was available to the petitioner . It is quite a strange methodology adopted by the petitioner that the Writ Petition was filed on 12.3.2018 against the r ejection of departmental appeal alone , whereas the dismissal order was challenged separately in the suit which was instituted on 14.07.2018 after filing the Writ P etition.

[11] The ultimate challenge must have been to the dismissal order rather than assailing the rejection order of the appeal. M erely challenging the order of rejecti on of the appeal could not serve any purpose , unless , the declaratory suit is proceeded by the competent court of law to decide the fate of the Petitioner’s dismissal from service . 5.

[12] According to Rule 1 of Order II, C.P.C., every suit shall as far as practicable be framed so as to afford ground for a final decision upon the subjects in the dispute and to prevent further litigation concerning them , whereas Rule 2 of Order II, C.P.C. explicates the niceties that every suit shall include the whole of the claim which the plaintiff is entitled to make in respect of the cause of action but the plaintiff may relinquish any portion of his claim in order to bring the suit within the jurisdiction of any Court.

[13] It is further provided under Sub -Rule (2) of Rule 2 of Order II CPC, that where a plaintiff omits to sue in respect of, or intentionally relinquishes, any portion of his claim, he shall not afterwards s ue in respect of the portion so omitted or relinquished. The expression “cause of action” means a bundle of facts which if traversed, a suitor claiming relief is required to prove for obtaining judgment which is always a fundamental element to confer the j urisdiction and enables a party to carry on an action in a court of law being a very significant constituent required to be incorporated in the plaint in terms of Rule 1 of Order VII C.P.C .

[14] The chequ ered history of the petitioner’s litigation transpires that he selected multiple forums to institute multiple litigation s to challenge the action of the C.P. -4- management instead of jotting down all the cause s of action available to him for suing in one go. The petitioner could unite both the cause s of action such as t he rejection order of the appeal and the dismissal order from service promptly instead of splitting the claims and opting to challenge them separately in the High Court and Civil C ourt which created the complication of overlapping the proceedings and also multiplicity of proceedings. 6.

[15] Though the petitioner ’s Writ P etition was dismissed by the learned High Court but certain observations have also been made that the suit for declaration instituted by the petitioner on 08.03.2016 was dismissed as withdraw n by the Civil Court following his statement on 29.03.2018 that he ha d submitted an application to respondent No.1/B ank for an amicable settlement .

[16] In fact, the said suit was withdrawn after the represent ative of the respondent No.1/Bank confirmed th at such an application has been received , therefore , the learned High Court observed in the impugned judgment that while deciding the application , the Competent A uthority shall not be influenced by any observations made in the High Court judgment. 7.

[17] Seemingly , the petitioner ha s already availed the appropriate remedy of filing a suit in the Civil C ourt for challenging his dismissal order . The Order dated 29.3.2018, passed by the learned Civil Judge, Ist Class, Islamabad, West, demonstrates that the learned judge recorded the statement of petitioner and Law Officer of ZTBL , who confirmed that an application to the management has been submitted by the petitioner for an amicable settlement on humanitarian and compassionate grounds which will be processed in accordance with law.

[18] After recording the statements, the suit was dismissed as withdrawn with the permission to file a fresh suit in case of further grievance . In view of this situation , we do not find any justification to interfere in the impugned judgment. However, if the management of the respondent No.1 has not decided the application moved by the petitioner till to date , then the petitioner may avail a remedy of filing fresh suit or in alternate, he is also at C.P. -5- liberty to move proper application fo r resurrection of his suit and if such application is filed in the Trial Court and the suit is resurrected/restored to its original position , then the learned Civil Court shall decide the suit on merits within three months after providing an ample opportunity of hearing to the parties.

[19] This Civil Petition is disposed of accordingly. Chief Justice Judge Judge Islamabad the 10th August , 2022 Khalid Approved for reporting.