Case No: C.P.6/2011
Case Title: Syed Mubashir Raza Jaffri & another v. Emolyees Old Age Benefits Institutions (EOBI) through its President.
Subject: U/A 184
Judge: Mr. Justice Anwar Zaheer Jamali
Judgment Date: 17-03-2014
Upload Date: 17-03-2014
Citations: 2014 SCMR 949
SC Citations: 2014 SCP 23
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/const.p.6_2011_final.pdf

[1] IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN (Original Jurisdic tion) Present Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ. Mr. Justice Ghulam Rabbani Constitution Petition No.06 of 2011 Syed Mubashir Razi Jaffri & another …Petitioners Versus EOBI & others …Respondents For the Petitioners: : Mr. Rashee d A. Razvi, Sr.

[2] ASC Respondents: : N.R. Date of hearing : 25.3.2011 O R D E R Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ. — Learned counsel contended that respondent EOBI (Employees OLD -Age Benefi t Institution) an institution/organization is resp onsible to receive in shape of contribution from huge number of insured persons and others under the EOB Act , 1976 and to disburse the amount to legitimate beneficiaries of the EOBI Pension Scheme under whi ch more than 3.7 million insured persons/workers are registered.

[3] He stated that currently more than 4,00,000.00 pensioners are being paid month ly pension in various categories , therefore, being custodian of the funds on behalf of the workers/labourers , the organization is required to conduct its business in a highly transparent manner instead of wasting the funds on whimsical and subjective consideration s.

[4] However, according to him presently massive corruption has been noticed by the petitioners of whom one is the member of the Trade Union whereas the other is employee over there. To substantiate his statement, he pointed out that in pursuance of the publication , which appear ed in d aily ‘Jang’ dated 16th April, 20 09, 132 vacancies were announced and applicat ions for the same were called for upto 15th May, 2009 , in response whereof applications in thousands were received and later call letters for Const.

[5] P. 2 interview were issued to the candidates alongwith schedule . According to learned counsel the said posts were to be filled in by means of open competition in a transparent manner but surprisingly instead of making recruitments/appointm ents on merit from amongst the candidates who were issued call letters , consolidated list s were prepared on 16th May, 2010 by Dr.

[6] Jum mani, PS to the Minister for Labours and Manpower and Imtiaz Ahmad who is D.G. F & A, according to which all these vacancies were filled on the recommendations of high ups/ influential person s, names of which have been mentioned in the list s. For con venience sake, extracts from the lists are reproduced hereinbelow: Const.

[7] P. 3 Const. P. 4 Const. P. 5 Const. P. 6 Const. P. 7 Const. P. 8 Const. P. 9 Const. P. 10 Const. P. 11 Const. P. 12 Const. P. 13 Const. P. 14 Const. P. 15 Const. P. 16 Const. P. 17 Const. P. 18 Const. P. 19 Const. P. 20 Const. P. 21 Const. P. 22 2. Learned counsel further pointed out that the appointment s were made in such an unwarranted manner that appointees were dir ected to submit their documents after their appointments were made.

[8] He referred to a copy of such letter reproduced hereinbelow to show that perhaps at the time of their appointment no document i.e. educational testimonial e tc. was taken into consideration and appointments took place against the posts simply on the recommendations of the functionaries as is evident from the above lists .

[9] Const. P. 23 3. Learned counsel stated that a good number of people were also appointed on deputation /contract basis and subsequently without following rules and regulations they were regularized. 4. Similarly , learned counsel stated that the investment ha s been made by the EOBI in the institutions, which are not much profitable and the institutions givin g better credit have been intentionally avoided .

[10] According to the learned counsel affairs of EOBI are not be ing run in a transparent manner inasmuch as responsible functionaries have started indulging in businesses, which are not considered assured profit able like the real estate , stock exchange etc. with the result that huge losses to public money have been caused . 5.

[11] After having heard the learned counsel and having gone through the rele vant record so placed before us, we consider that his case require s to be examined in terms of Article 184(3) of the Constitution as it seems that fundamental rights of Const. P. 24 huge number of workers and i nsured persons as per Articles 9, 14 and 25 of the Constitution have been violated .

[12] Therefore, we direct that notices be issu ed to the respondent s as well as to the person s, whose appointments have been questioned being non -transparent to provide opportunity of hearing to all of them. However, notices are required to be issued to them through President Board of Governors, EOBI/ Secretary Labour and Manpower with directions to effect service upon all of them wherever they are posted and submit compliance report prior to the next date of hearing.

[13] Similarly the President of Board/Secretary Labour is directed to submit complete recor d of the above persons as well as the persons who have been appointed on deputation/ contract basis for the last three years and as to whether they have been regularized or not? He is also directed to place on record as to whether the investment is being m ade in the profit bearing schemes or otherwise as alleged by the learned counsel. 5.

[14] Let the matter be adjourned to a date in office after three weeks. Chief Justice Judge Islamabad, the 25th March, 2011 Nisar/*