Case No: C.P.L.A.4835/2019
Case Title: Ijaz Akbar v. The Director General (ext) L & DD, Punjab, Lahore & others
Subject: Service/Forfeiture of past service
Judge: Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah
Judgment Date: 30-01-2023
Upload Date: 15-02-2023
Citations: 2023 SCMR 842
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 56
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._4835_2019.pdf

[1] judgment of the Punjab Service Tribunal (at Rawalpindi) , dated 21.10.2019 , passed in Appeal No.3087 of 2019 ) Ijaz Akbar ... Petitioner Versus The Director General (E xt.) L&DD, Punjab, Lahore and others ... Respondents For the petitioner : Mr. M. Bashir Khan, ASC . For the respondents : Mr. Sanaulla h Zahid, Add l.

[2] A.G., Punjab. Dr. Farooq, Additional Director , L&DD, Punjab . Mr. Wasim Ahmed, Superintendent , L&DD, Punjab . Date of h earing: 30.01.2023 ORDER Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. - The petitioner seeks leave to appeal against a judgment of the Punjab Service Tribunal, date d 21.10.2019 (“impugned judgment”) , whereby the Tribunal while maintaining the findings of the departmental authorities as to his guilt on the charge of willful absence from duty, has partly allowed h is appeal by reducing his penalty from forfeiture of two -year service to forfeiture of one year service . 2.

[3] Briefly, the facts of the case are that the petitioner was a Junior Clerk in the Department of Livestock and D airy Development (L&DD), Government of Punjab , and posted in the office of the District Officer Livestock, Chakwal . He remained absent from his duty from 02.02.2016 to 11.06.2016 . Upon report of the inquiry officer holding the petitioner guilty of the charge of willful absence from duty and recommending for the imposition of a major penalty, t he departmental competent authority imposed the major penalty of dismissal from service on the petitioner under Section 4(b)(vi) of the Punjab Employees Efficiency, Discipline and Accountability Act 2006 (“PEEDA Act”) .

[4] The departmental appellate authority , however, on appeal of the petitioner CP No. 2 converted the penalty of his dismissal from service into forfeiture of his past two -year service and reinstated him in service. The departmental appellate authority also ordered that the intervening period from the starting date of his absence from duty, i.e., 02.02.2016, to the date of his rejoining service upon reinstatement would be treated as an extraordinary leave without pay.

[5] The petitioner preferred a service appeal to the Tribunal, which was partly allowed to the ex tent of reducing his penalty from forfeiture of two-year service into forfeiture of one-year service , by maintaining the findings of the departmental authorities as to his guilt on the charge of willful absence from duty .

[6] The petitioner , being not satisfie d with the judgment of the Tribunal , has filed the present petition for leave to appeal. 3. The sole contention made before us by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that as the departmental appellate authority had ordered to treat the period of abse nce of the petitioner from duty as an extraordinary leave without pay, therefore, the petitioner could not have been held guilty of misconduct and punished for the said absence from duty.

[7] He has placed reliance , in support of his contention, on LDA v. Nade em Kachloo (2006 SCMR 434 ), Director -General, I .B. v. Muhammad Javed (2012 SCMR 165 ) and Sharif Abbasi v. WAPDA (2013 SCMR 903 ). 4. On the other hand, the l earned counsel for the respondents submits that once the departmental appellate authority had conver ted the penalty of dismissal for service into that of forfeiture of his two-year past service and had thus reinstated the petitioner into service , the period of his absence from duty had to be given so me treatment for the purpose of regularizing his reinst atement in service , and such treatment does not wash out the guilt of the petitioner .

[8] In this regard , he has relied upon DIG, NH& MP v. Ghulam Mustafa (2019 SCMR 95 ) and NAB v. Muhammad Shafique (2020 SCMR 425 ). 5. We have considered the contentions of the learned counsel for the parties, read the cases cited by them and examined the record of the case. 6. The u nauthorize d absence of a civil servant from his duty is an act which is prejudicial to ‘good order ’ and ‘service discipline ’, and thus constitute s misconduct for taking disciplinary action against him .1 Section 2(n)(vii) of the PEEDA Act has explicitly included the act of 1 Imtiaz Lali v.

[9] Returning Officer PLD 2008 SC 355; Muhammad Ali Bukhari v. Federation of Pakistan 2008 SCMR 214. CP No. 3 ‘absence from duty without prior approval of leave’ in the definition of ‘misconduct’ for the purpose of application of that Act. An d, as per Rule 2.11 of the Punjab Civil Services Pension Rules 1955 , a Government servant forfeits h is past service in case of his absence from duty without leave.

[10] Similarly, Article 420 of the Civil Service Regulations states that a n interruption in the s ervice of an officer entails forfeiture of his past service subject to certain exceptions mentioned therein. In view of this legal consequence of the absence from duty, a disciplinary authority , or an appellate authority, tribunal or court , when imposes a penalty lesser than dismissal or removal from service on a delinquent civil servant for his misconduct of being absen t from duty, it has to make an incidental order as to what treatment should be given to the period of his absence for the purpose of giving continuity to his service ; otherwise , the whole past service of the civil servant will stand forfeited , which would be the imposition of an additional penalty neither prescribed by the law nor imposed by the authority .

[11] The best possible incidental order , which may be made in such a situation, is therefore to make a fictional arrangement to account for such period of absence from duty in the service record of the civil servant by treating (deeming) the same as an extraordinary leave without pay, rather than any other kind of leave ; as in case of treating the said period as a leave of some other kind of leave (even if found due), the delinquent civil servant may claim pay of that period also, which would amount to awarding him a benefit rather than awarding a penalty for his fault.

[12] Thus, after imposing a penalty other than dismissal or removal from service, the making of an incidental order as to treating (deeming) the period of absence from duty as an extraordinary leave without pay , in no way, wash es out the misconduct committed. It may be underlined here that a lthough Section 4(b) (iii) of the PEEDA Act provides for the penalty of forfeiture of pas t service for a specific period , it has also limited the same to a maximum of five year period and thus does not permit the forfeiture of the whole past service exceeding a period of five years.

[13] In the present case, had the departmental appellate authority not ordered to treat the period of absence of the petitioner from his duty as an extraordinary leave without pa y, his whole past service would have been forfeited , instead of the imposed penalty of forfeiture of past service of two years (reduced to one year by the Tribunal). 7.

[14] In case of an unauthorize d absence of a civil servant from his duty , two courses are o pen to the departmental authority : (i) to condone the unaut horized absence by accepting his explanation (if found CP No. 4 justified) and sanction the ex-post fact o leave under the relevant leave rules , or (ii) to initiate the disciplinary proceedings against him and impose a penalty for the misconduct.

[15] Therefore, a civil servant who remains absent from his duty may apply for condonation of the absence by offering an explanation and seek the sanction of ex-post facto leave for that period. If the departmental author ity is satisfied that there was a sufficient cause for his absence, it may condone the absence and sanction the leave ex-post facto .

[16] If leave is so sanctioned, then the departmental authority cannot initiate disciplinary proceedings against the civil serva nt for that absence from duty. However, w here the civil servant who is unauthoriz edly absent does not re sume duty and offer any satisfactory explanation, or wher e the explanation offered by him is not satisfactory, the departmental authority is to initiate the discip linary proceedings and impose an appropriate penalty , which may range from a major penalty of dismissal or removal from service to a minor penalty of censure or withholding of increment for a specific period, mainly depend ing upon the nature of service, the position (duty) of the civil servant in that service , the period of a bsence and the cause for the absence.

[17] Where the penalty imposed on the delinquent civil servant is dismissal or removal from service , it may not be necessary to pass any incidental order relating to the period of absence , unless it is deemed necessary to recover any amount of pay, or other service benefit s, received by the civil servant during the period of his absence from duty; but w here any other penalty is awarded for the unauthoriz ed absence from duty , it will be necessary to pass some incidental order as to how the period of absence should be accounted for and dealt with in the service record of the civil servant .

[18] If the unauthorized absence from duty remains unaccounted for, it will result in an interruption in service of the civil servant , thereby forfeiting his whole past service and affecting his seniority, pension etc. Such incidental order directing how the perio d of absence should be treated i n the service record of the civil servant is thus an administrative arrangement , which does not affect or superse de the order imposing the penalty .2 8.

[19] The learned two -membe r benches of this Court in Nadeem Kachloo , Muhammad Javed and Sharif Abbasi referred to by the learned counsel for the petitioner have, it is most respectfully observed , mistakenly mingled the two distinct concepts of : (i) the grant of ex-post facto leave to the civil servant who remained absent from his duty, by 2 State of Punjab v.

[20] P.L. Singla AIR 2009 SC 1149. CP No. 5 accepting his explanation (if found justified) , and (ii) the fictional treatment given to the period of his absence from duty after holding him guilty of the misconduct for that absence and imposing a penalty other than his dismissal or removal from service, for continuity of his service.

[21] The statemen t of law made therein , that by treating the period of absence from duty as an extraordinary leave without pay, the ground of unauthorized absence no more remains available for awarding any penalty , does not state the correct legal position . These cases, so as far as they make the said statement of law either expressly or impliedly, are overruled, while the contra view of a three -member bench of this Court in Muhammad Shafique is respectfully agreed to.

[22] Muhammad Shafique has differentiated between t he retros pective grant of e xtraordinary leave without pay for the absence under Rule 9(3) of the Revised Leave Rules 1980 and the treatment given to the period of absence after imposition of the appropriate penalty for the misconduct of being absent from d uty, and rightly held that treating the period of absence in the latter case as extraordinary leave without pay does not undo the penalty imposed.3 9.

[23] In view of the above legal position, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is found me ritless. The impugned judgment does not call for any interference. The petition is therefore dismissed and the leave to appeal, declined . Islamabad, 30th January, 2023 Approved for reporting Asif Judge Judge Judge 3 Muhammad Shafiq case has been followed in the cases of Federation of Pakistan v.