Case No: C.P.43/2009
Case Title: Dr. Mohammad Aslam Khakhi & another v. S.S.P. (Operations) Rawalpindi and others
Subject: U/A 184
Judge: Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry
Judgment Date: 22-03-2011
Upload Date: 22-03-2011
Citations: 2013 SCMR 187
SC Citations: 2011 SCP 16
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Const.P_43_of_2009.pdf

[1] order dated 17.08.2009 be repeated to all the PPOs and the I.G. Police, Islamabad for compliance in letter and spirit. 6. While hearing this case it has been noticed that there is some gap of communication between the administration and the eunuchs perhaps for the reason that t hey have no representation o r they do not have a focal person, therefore, Secretaries Social Welfare and Special Education, Islamabad, may adopt a strategy to appoint one or more than one focal person amongst them who may interact with the administration. 7.

[2] In the orders noted above we have pointed out for initiating process to locat e the ascendants (parentage) of the eunuchs with a view that if the latter have any right of inheritance in moveable and immoveable properties , they should get the same accor ding to law Const.P.  4 but it seems that no progress has been made in this behalf so far.

[3] Secretaries Social Welfare of all the provinces and Commissioner Islamabad who have already registered the eunuchs may seriously look into this aspect of the case and ma ke effo rts to ensure that their rights in the property as are devolved on them according to law , are fully protected . 8. Petitioner contends that after passing the orders a significant progress has begun to take place and social status of the eunuchs is being gradually recognized yet due to lack of awareness/knowledge/ideas and information about the right s and obligations concerning the eunuchs not conveyed in every nook and corner , they are not getting what is actually due to them, therefore, NGOs should come f orward to disseminate the same appropriately .

[4] In this, it is h owever , observed that this is for the petitioner to interact with NGOs for the purpose because this Court is only interested , as it has been pointed out time and again, that in terms of Article 184(3) of the Constitution the fundamental rights of the eunuchs are to be fully protected. 9.

[5] Let the case be adjourned for a period of four weeks for further proceedings and the reports shall be submitted before the next date of hearing enabling the C ourt to go through the same to save the time. Chief Justice Judge Islamabad 22.03.2011 Zulfiqar