Case No: C.P.L.A.2045/2019
Case Title: Mubarik Ali Babar v. Punjab Public Service Commission thr. its Secretary, Lahore & others
Subject: Writ Petition/.
Judge: Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah
Judgment Date: 18-11-2022
Upload Date: 20-01-2023
Citations: 2023 SCMR 518
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 26
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._2045_2019.pdf

[1] judgment of Lahore High Court, Lahore dated 08.03.2019, passed in W.P No.20429 of 201 6) Mubarik Ali Babar ...…. Petitioner Versus Punjab Public Service Commission through its Secretary & others …Respondent (s) Petitioners : In person. Respondent s: N.R. Date of hearing: 18.11.2022 ORDER Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. – The petitioner has challenged the seats reserved for minorit ies and persons with disabilities (“PWDs ”) in the Combined Competitive Examination, 2015 (“ CCE”) conducted by the Punjab Public Service Commission , Lahore (“PPSC ”).

[2] In the advertisement issued by the PPSC for the post in the Provinc ial Management Service (BS-17) (“PMS”) under the Services and General Administration Department, Government of the Punjab (“ S&GAD ”), out of 62 posts, 53 posts were on open merit, 06 posts for PWDs and 03 posts for minorities . The petitioner challenge s the legality of the allocation and reservation of seats for the above two classes of persons and also prays that if this quota remain s unfilled in a particular year , the seats reserved against this special quota be made available to other deserving candidates applying under the general quota on open merit.

[3] The said claim of the petitioner was dismissed by the High Court through the impugned judgment dated 08.03.2019. Hence this petition. 2. We have heard the petitioner and have gone through the record of the case. It is important to begin with the constitutional scheme. The preamble of our Constitution1 provides that it is the “will of 1 The C onstitution of t he Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973.

[4] CP-. 2 the people ” of Pakistan to establish an “Order”. The term “ will of the people of Pakistan” is an inclusive term signifying all citizens irrespective of religion, caste, creed, race, sex, place of birth or personal abilities. Therefore, such a “will” is incomplete without including the will of the minoriti es and PWDs .

[5] The “Order” is a result of our collective vision and aspirations . The “Order” established by the “will of the people ” is pillared on principles which form our constitutional values , provid ing for freedom, equality, tolerance, social justice and democracy ; adequate provision for the minorities to freely profess and practice their religions and develop their cultures; safeguard s to protect the legitimate interest s of minorities , backward and depressed classes ; fundamental rights including equality of status and opportunity , social, economic and political justice; freedom of thought, expression, belief, faith, worship and association, subject to law and public morality.

[6] Tolerance, freedom, equality, social justice and democracy are central to our constitutional values which promote inclusion and abhor apartheid, exclusion, apartness , racism, bias and bigotry . These constitutional principles and values form an integral part of the Objectives Resolution which is a substantive part of the Constitution under Article 2 -A and is to be given effect accordingly.

[7] The Constitution is, therefore, a shared voice of its citizenry . 3. The Constitutional values specifically provide for “equality of status, of opportunity,” which means that every person in Pakistan has equal human status and worth and enjoys equal access to opportunities without discrimination based on caste, creed, race, sex, place of birth, etc.

[8] Undeniably, equality of status and opportunity includes access to employment to earn a decent livelihood. 4. Fundamental rights under the Constitution actualize these constitutional values; Article 9 provide s that every person shall have a right to life and liberty subject to law. “Life” includes all the attributes of a healthy and a meaningful life, while the right to “liberty” provides freedom, agency and choice to a person to be able to design his or her life in any manner he or she wants.

[9] Life and l iberty of any person in Pakistan is protected and there is no distinction between persons on the basis of religion, sex or creed; Article 14 provides that the dignity of a person is inviolable; Article 18 provi des that everyone has a right to a lawful profession or occupation . Articles 20, 22, 26 and 27 of the Constitution provide further safeguards for minorities .

[10] Amongst CP-. 3 fundamental rights, the right to dignity stands at the top, like a jewel in the crown of fundamental rights. This unique place is because the right to dignity is an absolute right, is non -negotiable and is not subject to any law. Therefore, the minimum right to dignity of the minorities and PWDs is that they ought to be considered equally with the rest of the majority of Muslims and the majority of persons with fuller abilities.

[11] Under the Constitution there is no distinction and therefore , these fundamental rights are fully available to the minorities and PWDs in the country as they are availab le to all other citizens of Pakistan. Article 36 of the Principles of Policy under the Constitution provides that the State shall safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of minorities including their due representation in the Federal and Provincial services.

[12] Article 37(a) proves that the State shall promote with special care the educational and economic interest of backward classes. Article 38(b) of the Constitution provides that all citizens (which undoubtedly includes minorities and PWDs) to be prov ided within the available resources of the country, facilities for work and adequate livelihood.

[13] Article 38(d ) provides that the State shall provide basic necessities of life to all citizens (which once again undoubtedly includes PWDs) who are unable to ea rn their liv elihood on account of infirmity or sickness. Review of the above constitutional scheme unfolds that the Constitution uplifts PWDs, gives them additional protection so that every effort (reasonable accommodation) is made to bring differently -abled persons at par with fully-abled persons .

[14] Similarly, it mandates that minorities are equal citizens of Pakistan and must be protected from all kinds and forms of discrimination. The Constitution, therefore, not only caters to minorities and PWDs as equal citizens of Pakistan, having equal rights and safeguards, it also provides extra protection to them. 5. “Backward ” and “depressed ” classes are not defined in the Constitution , therefore going by their simple meaning, they include any class of people who are marginalized, underprivileged, disadvantaged, lacking choice, agency, autonomy , level -playing field and opportunity .

[15] The marginalization and discrimination experienced by PWDs is arguably considered to be similar to the apartheid system in terms of segregation and discrimination based on a particular characteristic, leading to limited access to education, employment, and other opportunities, as well as social and economic m arginalization , thereby, marginali zing individuals and communities.

[16] Peo ple with disabilities are segregated from community life and face discriminat ion due to CP-. 4 pervasive attitudinal and systemic barriers that the law, policy and practice frameworks have fai led to remove, such as inaccessible or unequal facilities of housing, transport and education, segregated settings, barriers in accessing justice and legal systems, and employment and health discrimination.2 The effects of such discrimination are further expounded when intersecting with sexism, ageism, racism and other forms of inequality.3 Albie Sachs , the celebrated South Africa n Judge writes: "If there is one thing that the struggle against apartheid has taught us, it is how important it is to manage difference in society.

[17] Difference was used as the basis for apartheid. Difference became an instrument of domination and control. What if we can turn difference around to become a source of vitalit y, of variability, of richness? ”4 The United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affair’s flagship “Disability and Development Report”5 highlights that the professional potent ial of PWDs is often misunderstood and remains untapped due to misconceptions, negative societal attitudes and inaccessibility of workplaces, training and vocational skills cente rs.

[18] Lower rates of employment are persistently observ ed for PWDs . Lower education levels coupled with discrimination, stigma, negative attitudes, inaccessible transport and workplaces, and limited availability of accommo dations for PWDs , play a significant role in limiting job opportunit ies.6 Due to these reasons , PWDs are pushed backwa rds and depressed at the hands of an unfr iendly and un - accommodating eco system , making them fall under the rubric of the backward and depressed classes , as recognized by the Constitution .

[19] Under the Constitution , it is the obligation of the State to attend to the legitimate interests7 of these classes . Legitimate interests are all those interests which can help PWDs actualize their fundamental rights 2 Disabled People’s Organization Australia, Segregation of People with Disability is Discrimination and Must End, Position Paper (September, 2020). https://dpoa.org.au/wp -content/uploads//Segregation -of-People -with- Disability_Position -Paper.pdf. 3 Ibid. 4 Albie Sachs, We, the People – Insights of an Activist Judge, Page-250, Wits University Press (2016). 5 UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Disability and Development Report – Realizing the Sustainable Development Goals by, for and with pers ons with disabilities (2018). https://social.un.org/publications/UN -Flagship -Report -Disability -Final.pdf. 6 Ibid. 7 Indra Sawhney v.

[20] Union of India, AIR 1 993 SC 477; Muhammad Yousaf v. Chairman, FPSC, PLD 2017 Lahore 406. CP-. 5 under the Constitution and enable them to become effective members of the society.8 6. The word “minorities ” on the other hand, signifies merely a statistical number, representing a class of people in the country who are Non -Muslims and in no manner does it imply that they are lesser citizens or in any manner less entitled to the fundamental rights under the Co nstitution. 96.5 % of Pakistan’s population is Muslim.

[21] Minorities make up approximately 3% of the population.9 Our national flag, our badge of honour and national unity, shows the minorities in the white alongwith the green signifying the majority Muslim p opulation. The majority (Muslims) and the minority (Non -Muslims) of Pakistanis together constitute the paradigm of Pakistan.

[22] Our national flag stands higher because it represents both the Muslims and the Non -Muslims . Moving towards an inclusive society is getting closer to realizing our constitutional values. “If society is intolerant, embarrassed , exclusionary, its own imaginative heart is being restricted. Its capacity for human empathy is being denied.

[23] Exclusion damages the way we understand and characterize the world we live in. Inclusion enhances our humanity.”10 7. Quaid -e-Azam, Muhammad Ali Jinnah repeatedly affirmed that as a foundational principle of Pakistan, rights of all minorities shall be safeguarded and all citizens of Pakistan are equal and have equal rights irrespective of their religion, colour, caste or creed.

[24] He assured and asser ted that “minorities to whichever community they may belong, will be safeguarded. Their religion or faith or belief will be secure. There will be no interference of any kind with their freedom of worship. They will have their protection with regard to thei r religion, faith, their life, their culture.

[25] They will be, in all respects, the citizens of Pakistan without any distinction of caste or creed” .11 At the time of the inception of Pakistan, while asserting the above said principle as the first President of the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan, Quaid -e-Azam 8 As per the available disability statistics provided by the Pakistan Bureau of Statistics, the population of PWDs in Pakis tan is 3,71,833 (data available up till 28.02.2021). 9 Census, 2017 , Pakistan Bureau of Statistics.

[26] Minorities in Pakistan include Christians, Hindus, Ahmadis, Sikhs, Baha’is, Parsis, Buddhists, Judaists, Kalasha etc. 10 Albie Sachs, We, the P eople – Insights of an Activist Judge, Page-250, Wits University Press (2016). 11 Quaid -e-Azam, Muhammad Ali Jinnah, as Governor General designate of Pakistan, at a press conference in New Delhi on 14th July, 1947. (S.M.

[27] Burke, Jinnah Speeches and Statements 1947 -48, Page -12, Oxford University Press (Fifth Impression, 2009)) CP-. 6 unequivocally stated that “you are free; you are free to go to your temples, you are free to go to your mosques or to any other place of worship in this State of Pakistan. You may belong to any religion or caste or creed – that has nothing to do with the business of the State … we are starting with this fundamental principle that we are all citizens and equal citizens of one State” .12 He was conscious of the fact that equal treatment of minorities was not on ly important for the prosperity and growth of Pakistan, it was a duty cast upon all Muslims by Islam as “the tenets of Islam enjoin on every Musalman to give protection to his neighbours and to the minorities regardless of caste and creed13 … in Islam there is no difference between man and man.

[28] The qualities of equality, liberty and fraternity are the fundamental principles of Islam .”14 8. In order to actualize the constitutional mandate and the vision of our founding father, we have the Disabled Persons (Employment and Rehabilitation) Ordinance, 1981 (“Ordinance ”) which , post 18th amendment , has translated into provi ncial laws.15 Provisions of the Ord inance are pari materia to the Punjab Law.

[29] Section 10 of the Ordinance , as applicable in Punjab, provides that not less than three percent (3%) of the total number of persons employed by an establishment at any time sh all be PWDs in the manner and procedure provided under the said Ordinance. Similarly, notification dated 27.3.2010, issued under section 23 of t he Punjab Civil Servants Act, 1974 by the S&GAD (Regulation s Wing), 5% quota has to be reserved for minorities ( Non-Muslims) against the total number of posts advertised in the future, including posts to be filled on the basis of competitive examination to be conducted by the PPSC .

[30] Later on through an amendment16 brought about in the said notification , the vacancies reserved for minorities for which qualified candidates are not available at the time of a particular recruitment process , shall be carried forward 12 Presidential Address to the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan at Karachi on 1 1th August, 1947 ( ibid, Page-25). 13 Speech at a rally at the University Stadium, Lahore on 30th October, 1947 ( ibid, Page-70). 14 Address to the Bar Association, Karachi, on the occasion of the Holy Prophet’s (PBUH) birthday on 25th January, 1948 (ibid, Pag e-97). 15 In Punjab: the Disabled Persons (Employment and Rehabilitation) (Amendment) Act, 2012; In Khyber Pakhtunkhwa: the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Disabled Persons (Employment and Rehabilitation) (Amendment) Act, 2012 .

[31] Recent legislation on PWDs in other provinces include the Sindh Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2018; the Balochistan Persons with Disabilities Act, 2017; in the ICT, the ICT Rights of Persons with Disability Act, 2020 and in Gilgit -Baltistan, the Gilgit -Baltistan Persons with Disabilities Act, 2019. 16 Through notification dated 09.2.2015 .

[32] CP-. 7 and filled through appointment of pe rsons belonging to minorities (N on- Muslims). We have noted with concern that according to the fact finding report titled “Unequal Citizens, Ending Systemic Discrimination against Minorities” (“ Report ”)17 published in May, 2022 by the National Commission of Human Rights ( “NCHR ”) established under the National Comm ission for Human Rights Act, 2012 with the mandate to promote and protect human rights as provided for in the Constitution and the various international instruments to which Pakistan is a State party or shall become a State party , advertisements published in major newspapers all over the country show that rel igious minorities have been recruited exclusively for sanitary work .

[33] The Report shows that in the advertisements, under eligibility requirements, there is often a clause that states ‘Only Non -Muslims Apply.’ Such discriminatory advertisement s and employment selection process limiting the job quota only for low level posts is o ffensive to the c onstitution al values , the fundamental rights of the minorities and the notification mentioned above .

[34] The R eport recommends ending discrimination against minorities in the employment quota, ending the practice of publishing discriminatory advertisements and ensuring public transparency in the number of minority posts filled across each level of the government.18 We fully suppor t the said recomme ndati ons of the NCHR in the Report and accordingly direct that the r espective governments shall ensure that the employment quota of the minorities is maintained at all levels and to strictly avoid discriminatory and demeaning advertisements flouting the dignity an d self-respect of the minorities. 9.

[35] In order to safeguard the rights of the minorities a nd PWDs and to provide equality of status and opportunities, the State has to endeavor to bridge th e gap and ensure that the differently -abled persons and the N on-Muslim minorit y in our country get to enjoy the ir fundamental rights under the Constitution with the same fervour and force as enjoyed by the Muslim majority and majority of persons with fuller abilities .

[36] Hence other than the general seats, the addition al provision of quota for the PWDs and the minorities reaffirms the constitutional commitment. 10. The argument of the petitioner that in case the said seats are not fil led by PWDs and the N on-Muslim minorit y in a particular 17 Unequal Citizens – Ending Systemic Discrimination against Minorities.

[37] NCHR Fact Finding Report. May, 2022. 18 Ibid. CP-. 8 year, the said seats should be opened and made available to general quota . This i s not permissible as it would offend constitutional values, fundamental rights and the Principles of Policy as discussed above. The seats earmarked for minorities or PWDs must be retained and carried forwa rd.

[38] This quota is their constitutional right and cannot be reversed or made available to other citizens. 11. For the above reasons we agree with the final conclusion arrived at by the High Court in the impugned judgment and for the reasons given above , this petition is accordingly dismissed and leave is refused. 12.

[39] It is also pointed out that the word “disabled” has already been put to disuse in Malik Ubaidullah19 and, therefore, the PPSC is directed to ensure that the word “disabled” is not used and instead persons with disabilities or persons with different abilities is put to use . We are hopeful that in the future th ese terms will be incorporated in the official correspondence as well as relevant notification s, including public advertisements, issued by the Government.

[40] A copy of this order shall be dispatched to the Chief Secretary, Government of the Punjab as well as t he Chief Secretarie s of other provinces to ensure that this order is complied with in letter and spirit at the national level . 13. Before parting with this order , we would like to appreciate and commend the valuable assistance provided to us by Muhammad Hassan Ali, Law C lerk in rendering this order .

[41] Islamabad, 18th November , 2022. Approved for reporting Sadaqat Judge Judge Judge 19 PLD 2020 SC 599 .