Case No: C.P.L.A.3127/2020
Case Title: Qazi Naveed ul Islam v. District Judge, Gujrat and others
Subject: Succession Certificate/.
Judge: Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah
Judgment Date: 12-01-2023
Upload Date: 26-01-2023
Citations: PLD 2023 SC 298
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 32
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._3127_2020.pdf

[1] order of Lahore High Court, Lahore dated 06.10.2020, passed in Writ Pet ition No.) Qazi Naveed ul Islam …. Petitioner Versus District Judge, Gujrat, etc. …. Respondents For the petitioner : Mr. Anis Muhammad Shahzad, ASC. For the respondents : Respondent No.3, Qazi Mubasher Shahzad, in person. Date of hearin g: 12.01.2023 ORDER Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. - The petitioner seeks leave to appeal against an order of the Lahore High Court, dated 06.10.2020 (“impugned order”), whereby the High Court has dismissed his writ petition filed against the orders of the trial court and revisional court, dated 14.12.2015 and 20.02.2016 respectively.

[2] The trial court, by its order dated 14.12.2015, had dismissed the application of the petitioner filed under Section 476 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 (“CrPC”) against resp ondents No. 3 to 5 and by its order dated 20.02.2016, the revisional court had dismissed his revision petition filed against that order of the trial court.

[3] All three courts below have thus decided the matter against the petitioner. 2. Briefly, the facts o f the case are that on the death of his father ( Qazi Khursheed Alam ), respondent No.3 ( Qazi Mubasher Shahzad ) made an application for the issuance of a succession certificate in respect of an amount of Rs.32,185/ - left by his deceased father in a bank acco unt, which was allowed by the trial court on 03.12.2009.

[4] T he present petitioner ’s father (Qazi Zaho or Alam) , who was the brother of the deceased Qazi Khursheed Alam and was in litigation with him over some other property , made a miscellaneous application t o the trial court, on 10.11.2010, for the cancellation of the succession certificate and taking legal action against respondents No. 3 to 5 on the ground that in C.P. 3127 of 20 20 - 2 - the application for the succession certificate as well as in their statements made before the court, respondent No.3 and his brother (respondent No.4) and mother (respondent No.5) had not me ntioned the names of the daughters of the deceased Qazi Khursheed Alam, and had thus played fraud and perjury i n the court proceedings .

[5] The petitioner’s father died during the pendency of this application, upon wh ich the petitioner and his siblings were substituted as applicants in the application. 3. The sisters of respondent No.3 (daughters of the deceased Qazi Khursheed Alam) appeared before the t rial court and filed the ir written reply opposing the said application with the assertions that the applicant s had no locus standi to make the application; that they had surrendered their share in the amount of Rs.32,185/ - left by their deceased father and had no obj ection on the succession certificate issued in favour of their brother, respondent No.3, to receive that amount from the bank; and that their family was in litigation with the applicant s for the last about  years and they had made the application just t o blackmail respondents No.3 to 5 (their brothers and mother) . 4.

[6] Although we are unable to understand why the trial court did not reject the application summarily , and instead proceeded further thereon by framing issues, after the said reply of the sist ers of respondent No.3, ultimately the trial court dismissed the application after recording evidence on the issues , vide its order dated 27.01.2015 , with the finding s that the applicants being not the legal heirs of the deceased Qazi Khursheed Alam had no locus standi and cause of action to challenge the succession certificate issued in respect of his legacy , and that the filing of the application was based on mala fide in order to avenge the other litiga tion ensuing between the parties .

[7] This order of the trial court was not challenged by the petitioner or any of his siblings and thus attained finality. 5. Just about a month before the final decision of that application, and probably in view of the expected decision, the present petitioner filed an applica tion under Section 476 of the CrPC, on 09.12.2014, against respondents No. 3 to 5, making the same averments.

[8] Respondent s No. 3 to 5 filed their written reply, opposing the application. After hearing the arguments of the counsel for the parties, the trial court dismissed this application, vide its order dated 14.12.2015, hol ding C.P. 3127 of 20 20 - 3 - therein that the matter had already been decided in the order dated 27.01.15 passed on a similar application on the same matter, which order having not been challenged had attained finality and that the issue of mala fide in the previous application had been decided against the petitioner.

[9] The petitioner preferred a revision petition against this order of the trial court, which was dismissed by the revisional court, vide its order da ted 20.02.2016. The petitioner did not stop there and filed a writ petition in the High Court, challenging the orders of the trial a nd revisional courts.

[10] The High C ourt dismissed his writ petition, by the impugned order. Hence, the petitioner has filed the present petition, in this Court, for leave to appeal. 6. Having heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and respondent No.3 in person and examining the record of the case, we are of the view that it is a classic case of abusing the process of the c ourt.

[11] Respondent No.3 has been punished with a penalty of purs uing an outright frivolous litigation for a period of more than a decade, just for the reason that he had got a succession certificate in his favour to receive a meag re amount of Rs.32,185/ - left by his deceased father in a bank account, and tha t too on the applications of the persons who had no right or interest in the legacy of his deceased father rather had been in litigation over some other property first against the deceased father of respon dent No.3 and after his death against respondent No.3 and his mother and siblings. 7.

[12] To our query, as to what right or interest of the present petitioner or his deceased father was affected by the issuance of the succession certificate in favour of respo ndent No.3, the answer of the learned counsel for the petitioner was nothing but that the petitioner and his decea sed father had acted just as informer s of the commission of offences of fraud and perjury with the court during the proceedings of the applica tion for succession certificate.

[13] The spiteful conduct of the petitioner and his deceased father in making repeated applications and venomously pursuing them up to this Court do not paint of picture of a bonafide informer commited to unfold the offences o f fraud and perjury for the love of justice, equity and fairplay . The conduct of the petitioner reeks of private vengeance against respondent No.3 and his mother and siblings, because of a simmering dispute over some other property.

[14] C.P. 3127 of 20 20 - 4 - 8. It is also regretta ble to note that the first application filed by the petitioner’s father and later pursued by the petitioner and his siblings after his death, for cancellation of the succession certificate and taking legal action against respondents No. 3 to 5, which shoul d have been dismissed summarily after the filing of opposing written reply of the sisters of respondents No. 3, was proceeded with unnecessarily by framing issues and decided after the protracted proceedings of about five years. 9.

[15] The power conferred by Section 476, CrPC on a Civil, Revenue or Criminal Court to take cognizance of certain offences committed in, or in relation to , any proceeding s before it, is discretion ary as evident from the expression, “may take cognizance”, used in th e Section. No doubt , like all other discretionary powers, the court concerned is to exercise this discretion judiciously, not arbitrarily , while taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of the case.1 Previously, before its substitution by the Act XXI of 1976, Se ction 476 had stated it expressly that the c ourt is to ta ke action under Section 476 when it is of opinion that “it is expedient in the interests of justice” that an inquiry should be made into such an offence.

[16] As the discretionary powers must always be ex ercised in the interests of justice, w e are of the considered view that notwithstanding the omission of that expression in the present Section 476, while exercising its discretion under this Section the court concerned should give prime consideration to t he question, whether it is expedient in the interests of justice to take cognizance of the offence .

[17] The court is to exercise this discretionary power with due care and c aution , and must be watchful of the fact that its process under S ection 476 is not abuse d by an unscrupulous litigant scheming to wreak private vengeance or satisfy a private grudge against a person ,2 as has been done by the petitioner in the present case. 10.

[18] In view of the stance of the sisters of respondent No.3 as to having no objection to the succession certificate issued in favour of their brother, respondent No. 3, the trial court had rightly dismissed both the applications, the first filed by the petitioner’s father and the second by the petitioner, vide its orders dated 27.01.2015 a nd 14.12.2015, by noting the fact that the same had been filed with mala fide to avenge a private grudge and without having any interest in the matter decided by 1 Abdul Hakeem v.

[19] State 1994 SCMR 1103 . 2 Feroze Din v. Munir 1970 SCM R 10 ; Naushaba v. Khalil Ahmad 2004 SCMR 805. C.P. 3127 of 20 20 - 5 - it. And the order of the trial court has correctly been maintained by the revisional court and the High Court. The present petition is completely frivolous and vexatious and the process of court has been abused just to pressurise the other side and to settle a personal score.

[20] Imposition of costs 11. Such frivolous , vexatious and speculative litigation unduly burdens the courts giving artificial rise to pendency of case s which in turn clogs the justice system and delay s the resolution of genuine disputes. Such litigation is required to be rooted out of the system and one of the ways to curb such practice of instituting frivolous and vexatious cases is by imposi ng of costs under Order 28 Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules, 1980 (“Rules”).

[21] The spectre of being made liable to pay actual costs should be such as to make every litigant think twice befor p utting forth a vexatious claim or defence3 before the Court . These costs in an appropriate case can be over an d above the nominal costs which includ e costs of the time spent by the successful party, the transportation and lodging, if any, or any other inci dental cost, besides the amount of the court fee, process fee and lawyer's fee paid in relation to the litigation.4 Imposition of costs in frivilous and vexatious cases meets the requirement of fair trial under Article 10A of the Constitution , as it not on ly discourages frivi lous claims or defences brought to the court house but also absence of such cases allows more court time for the adjudication of genuine claims .

[22] It also incentivizes the litigants to adopt alternative dispute resolution (ADR) processes and arrive at a settlement rather than rushing to courts.5 Costs lay the foundation for expeditious justice6 and promote a smart legal system that enhances access to justice by entertaining genuine claims. The purpose of awarding costs at one level is to c ompensate the successful party for the expenses incurred to which he has been subjected and at another level to be an effective tool to purge the legal system of frivolous, vexatious and speculative claims and defences.

[23] In a nutshell costs enourage alterna tive dispute resolution ; settlements between the parties ; and reduces unnecessary burden off the courts , so that they can attend to genuine claims. Costs are a 3 Vinod Seth v. Devinder Bajaj (2010) 8 SCC 1; Province of Balochistan v. Murree Brewery Company PLD 2007 SC 386 (5 -MB). 4 Ibid. 5 Ibid. 6 Aricle 37(d) of the Principle s of Policy under the Constitution.

[24] C.P. 3127 of 20 20 - 6 - weapon of offence for the plaintiff with a just claim to present and a shield to the defendant w ho has been unfairly brought into court7. 12. In the instant case, the petitioner has repeatedly abused the courts to advance a personal grudge by repeatedly filing vexatious and frivilous claims in various courts, not only wasting the precious time of these courts but also causing anguish and pain to the other party that unnecessary, unfair and prolonged litigation brings.

[25] We, therefore, dismiss the present petition with costs of Rs.100,000 /- which shall be deposited by the petitioner in the trial court for payment to respondent No.3 (Qazi Mubasher Shahzad) within three month s from today. In case of failure by the petitioner to deposit the said costs wit hin the prescribed time, they shall be recovered from the petitioner as a money decree with 10% month ly increase , and the costs of the execution proceedings shall also be recovered in addition thereto.

[26] Islamabad, 12th January, 2023. Approved for reporting Iqbal Judge Judge Judge 7 Arthur L.Godhart, ‘Costs’ (1929) 38 Yale Law Journal 849