Case No: C.P.L.A.3465-L/2022
Case Title: Ghulam Fareed (deceased) through his L.Rs., etc v. Daulan Bibi
Subject: Suit for Declaration/.
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa
Judgment Date: 20-11-2023
Upload Date: 30-11-2023
Citations: 2024 SCMR 202
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 372
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._3465_l_2022.pdf

[1] order dated 25.11.2022 passed by the Lahore High Cour t, Lahore in Civil Revision No. 4911 of 2016. Ghulam Fareed (deceased) through his L.Rs., etc ....Petitioner s Versus Daulan Bibi ….Responden t For the petitioner s: Mr. Seerat Hussain Naqvi, ASC through video link from Lahore Branch Registry. For the respondent: N.R.

[2] Date of Hearing: 20 November 2023 ORDER Qazi Faez Isa, CJ . Learned counsel for the petitioner s states that the petitioners’ predecessor had purchased land through sale mutation, No.727, attested on 13 June 1994. However, the respondent filed a suit on 6 November 2008, which was hopelessly time barred.

[3] He further states that the respondent had sim ply denied her thumb impression on the said mutation and that the report of the Finger Print Bureau, Punjab is in itself not sufficient for disproving that the sale mutation bore her thumb impression. 2. The suit filed by the respondent was decreed on 16 O ctober 2014 against which the petitioner filed an appeal which w as dismissed on 29 October 2016 .

[4] Thereafter, the petitioners invoked the revisional jurisdiction of the High Court but the Civil Revision filed by the petitioners was dismissed on 25 November 2022. Fifteen years have passed since the suit was filed by the respondent , and at three different forums she succeeded and the petitioners lost.

[5] On our query we are told that the possession of the subject land remains with the petitioners. The petitioner s have disregarded all three decisions of the court s and continue to retain the illegal possession of the land . 3. The burden to establish the purported sale lay upon the beneficiary of the sale but this was not discharge d.

[6] The respondent was C.P. No.3465 -L of 20 22 2 not required to disprove the sale yet she undertook to do so. She came forward and had her purported thumb impression was sent for forensic determination by the Finger Print Bureau, Punjab which submitted a comprehensive report and the witness from Finger Print Bureau was also produced as a witness ( PW-3).

[7] It was conclusively established that the thumb impression on the sale mutation was not hers. 4. The contention with regard to the belated filing of the suit , the respondent had stated in the plaint that she had learnt of the purported sale mutation three months earlier. We enquired from the learned counsel whether any evidence was produced to show that the respondent -plaintiff was aware about the sale mutation much before then, and we were not referred to anything.

[8] Issue No.4 pertained to limitation and the learned Judge had correctly noted that the onus to prove it lay upon the defendant. In attending to the issue of limitation the learned Judge determined that the defendant had not been able to establish prior knowledge. 5. All three courts had correctly decided th e matter in accordance with the law and the two points urged by the learned counsel are not sustainable either in fact or in law.

[9] The courts had dealt charitably with the defendant -petitioners by not imposing costs , let alone substantial costs which in our opinion were merited. This error need s correction and we dismiss this petition with cost s throughout . And, as the petitioners have remained in illegal possession of the said land we also impose compensatory cost in the sum of one hundred thousand rupees.

[10] The petitioners are further directed to immediately hand over the subject land to the respondent , and if they fail to do so the concerned revenue officer /official shall ensure that its possession is delivered to the respondent immediately. Copy of the order passed today be sent to the concerned revenue authorit y for information and compliance and copy be sent to the respondent for information.