Case No: C.P.26/2013
Case Title: Khurram Shehzad Chughtai v. Federation of Pakistan and others
Subject: U/A 184
Judge: MR. JUSTICE JAWWAD S. KHAWAJA
Judgment Date: 17-03-2014
Upload Date: 17-03-2014
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2014 SCP 21
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/const_petition_26_2013_17.03.pdf

[1] ORDER We have heard this matter partly. As noted in our previoius order we are anxious that this matter is decided at the earliest and if possible, before the auction of 3G and 4G licen ces. We are told that previously the date of this auction was fixed as 7th April, but now it has been postponed to 23rd April, 2014. 2.

[2] Today, while hearing this petition, we asked the learned Attorney General to show the method of book keeping of the USF and the treatment of the Fund, after the m onies of the USF were transferred to the Federal Consolidated Fund (FCF). He state d that the Ministry of Finance would be aware of the book -keeping but today no representative of Const.P.26 of 2013 2 the said Ministry , conversant with this aspect of the case is present.

[3] He shall, therefore, ensure presence of a fully conversant functionary of the Ministry of Finance to be present in Court tomorrow i.e. 18th March, 2014. 3. Additionally, it will be the office of the Auditor General and the Accountant General of Pakistan Revenue (AGPR), who will be fully aware of the rules applicable to the FCF.

[4] Mr. Athar Minallah, learned ASC states that the Auditor General has already determine d and prepared the Manual of Accounting Principles in exer cise of powers under Article 170 of the Constitution in respect of the F CF. This will help in determining the status/constitutionality of the transfer of USF funds from the National Bank and eight other scheduled Banks to the FCF.

[5] The office shall issue no tice to the Auditor General and to the AGPR Islamabad who may depute officers of their relevant departments conversant with the Manual of Accounting Principles as well as the manner in which the USF and the FCF are maintained and audited according to such Manual. 4. Today, we were also informed by Mr.

[6] Kamran, Manager (Finance), USF that prior to the amendment in the USF Rules made in 2013, the USF was earning interest/profit on the funds. In the financial year ending 30th June, 2013 a sum of rupees 5.6 bil lion was earned by the USF as income on the monies of the fund deposited with the National Bank and other scheduled Banks.

[7] The Manager (Finance) stated that after the transfer of monies of USF to the FCF not a single rupee has been earned on the sums belon ging to the USF. 5. The learned Attorney General for Pakistan submitted that the fundamental issue in this case will revolve around whether or not the monies in the USF can be transferred to the Federal Consolidated Fund (FCF) .

[8] He stated that even if it i s held that the monies in the USF cannot be transferred to the FC F, the fact remains that the investment s of USF could have yielded a much higher return than the sum of rupees 5.6 billion as noted above. 6. Let this matter come up for hearing as a part -heard case on 18th March, 2014.