Case No: C.P.15/2002
Case Title: Case_2451
Subject: N/A
Judge: Mr. Justice Sh. Riaz Ahmed
Judgment Date: 27-04-2002
Upload Date: 27-07-2002
Citations: PLD 2002 SC 853
SC Citations: 2002 SCP 6
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/JR_Detailed_Judgment_in_Referendum_Case.pdf

[1] ORDER SH. RIAZ AHMED, C.J. - On account of the extraordinary situation, which prevailed on 12th October 1999, General Pervez Musharraf, Chief of Army Staff and Chairman, Joint Chie fs of Staff Committee, through an extra-constitutional measure took over the government a nd the affairs of the country. 2.

[2] On 14th October 1999, Proclamation of Emergency was issued, which had to take effect from 12th October 1999. The said Proclamation o f Emergency reads as under: - “PROCLAMATION OF EMERGENCY ” “In pursuance of deliberations and decisions of Chiefs of Staff of the Armed Forces and Corps Commanders of Pakistan Army, I, General Pervez Musharraf, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee and Ch ief of Army Staff proclaim Emergency throughout Pakistan and assume the office of the Chief Executive of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. “I hereby order and proclaim as follows: (a) The Constitution of the Isla mic Republic of Pakistan shall remain in abeyance; (b) The President of Pakistan shall continue in office; (c) The National Assembly, th e Provincial Assemblies and Senate shall stand suspended; (d) The Chairman and Deputy Chai rman of the Senate the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly and the Provincial Assemblies shall stand suspended; (e) The Prime Minister, the Fede ral Ministers, Ministers of State, Advisors to the Prime Minister, Parliamentary Secretaries, the Provincial Gove rnors, the Provincial Chief Ministers, the Provincial Minist ers and the Advisors to the Chief Ministers shall cease to hold office; (f) The whole of Pakistan will come under the control of the Armed Forces of Pakistan.

[3] This Proclamation shall come into force at once and be deemed to have taken effect on and 12th day of October, 1999.” 3. On the same day, i.e. 14thof October 1999, the Provisional Constitution Order No. 1 of 1999 was issued, which reads as follows: - PROVISIONAL CONSTITUTION ORDER NO. 1 OF 1999 “In pursuance of Proclamation of the 14th day of October, 1999, and in exercise of all powers enabling him in that behalf, the Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee and Chief of Army Staff and Chief Executive of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan under the Proclama tion of Emergency of 14th October 1999 (hereinafter referred to as the Chief Executive) is pleased to make and promulgate the following Order- 1. (1) This Order may be called Provisional Constitution Order No. 1 of 1999. (2) It extends to the whole of Pakistan. (3) It shall come into force at once. 2. (1) Notwithstanding the abeyan ce of the provisions of the Constitution of the Islamic Republ ic of Pakistan, hereinafter referred to as the Constitution, Pa kistan shall, subject to this Order and any other Orders made by the Chief Executive, be governed, as nearly as may be, in accordance with the Constitution. (2) Subject as aforesaid, all co urts in existence immediately before the Commencement of th is Order shall continue to function and to exercise th eir respective powers and jurisdiction: Provided that the Supreme Court or High Courts and any other court shall not have the powers to make any order against the Chief Executive or any pe rson exercising powers or jurisdiction under his authority. (3) The Fundamental rights conferre d by Chapter 1 of Part II of the Constitution, not in conflict with the Proclamation of Emergency or any Order made th ereunder from time to time shall continue to be in force. 3. (1) The President shall act on, and in accordance, with the advice of the Chief Executive. (2) The Governor of a Province shall act on, and in accordance with the instructions of the Chief Executive. 4. (1) No Court, tribuna l or other authority sha ll call or permit to be called in question the Proc lamation of Emergency of 14th day of October, 1999 or any Order made in pursuance thereof. (2) No judgement, decree, writ, order or process whatsoever shall be made or issued by a ny court or tribunal against the Chief Executive or any aut hority designate d by the Chief Executive. 5. (1) Notwithstanding the abey ance of the provisions of the Constitution, but subject to the Orders of the Chief Executive all laws other than the Consti tution, all Ordinances, Orders, Rules, Bye laws, Regulations, Notifications and other legal instruments in force in any part of Pakistan whether made by the President or the Governor of a Province, shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have al ways been so inserted, shall continue in force until altere d, amended or repealed by the Chief Executive or any authority designated by him. (2) In all laws including all Ac ts, Ordinances, Orders, Rules, Bye-laws, Regulations, Notifi cations and all other legal instruments in force in any part of Pakistan, whether made by the President or the Governor of a Province, the words, “Prime Minister”, and the words, “Chief Minister”, wherever occurring, shall be deemed subs tituted by the words, “Chief Executive of the Islamic Re public of Pakistan”, and “Governor” respectively. 5A. (1) An Ordinance promulga ted by the President or by the Governor of a Province sh all not be subject to th e limitation as to its duration prescribed in the Constitution. (2) The provisions of Clause (1) sh all also apply to an Ordinance issued by the President or by the Governor, which was in force immediately before the commen cement of the proclamation Order of Chief Executive of th e Fourteenth day of October 1999.

[4] Subject to the Proclamation Order of the Chief Executive of the Fourteenth day of October, 1999 and the provisions of the Provisional Constitution Order No. 1 of 1999 as amended, the President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan on the advice of the Chief Executive, and the Governor of the Province on instructions of the Chief Execu tive, may issue and promulgate Ordinances which shall not be s ubject to the limitation as to their duration prescribed in the Constitution. 6.

[5] The Proclamation of Emergency issued on 28th day of May 1998, shall continue but subject to th e provisions of Proclamation of Emergency dated 14th day of October 1999 and this Provisional Constitution Orde r and any other Order made thereunder. 7. All persons who, immediately be fore the commencement of this Order, were in the service of Pa kistan as defined in Article 260 of the Constitution and those persons who immediately before such commencement were in office as Judge of the Supreme Court, the Federal Shariat Cour t or a High Court or Auditor- General or Ombudsman and Ch ief Ehtesab Commissioner, shall continue in the said service on the same terms and conditions and shall enjoy the same privileges, if any.” 4.

[6] It is pertinent to mention that Mr. Muhammad Rafiq Tarar, the former President of Pakist an continued in office under the Provisiona l Constitution Order No. 1 of 1999. On 20thJune, 2001 the Chief Executive issued Chie f Executive’s Order No. 2 of 2001 in pursuance of the Proclamation of Emergency (Amendment) Order, 2001.

[7] It came into force at once. It substituted clause (b) o f para (2) of the Proclamati on of Emergency of the four teenth day of October 1999. Clause (b) reads as follows: - (b) ‘The person holding the offi ce of the President of the Islamic Republic of Pakist an immediately before the commencement of the Proclamation of Emergency (Amendment) Order, 2001, shall cea se to hold the office with immediate effect.

[8] Under the same Order, in clause (c) of para (2) ibid, the word, ‘suspended’ was substituted with the words, ‘d issolved with immediate effect ’. Clause (d) of para (2) ibid. was substituted as under: - (d) The Chairman and Deputy Ch airman of the Senate have already ceased to hol d office; the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Na tional Assembly and the Provincial Assemblies shall also cease to hold office with immediate effect. 5.

[9] On the same day, i.e. the 20thof June, 2001, the Chief Executive issued Chief Executive’s Orde r No. 3 of 2001 and the Preamble to the said Order read that “whereas it is expedien t to provide for succession to the office of the President o f the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and for matters connected ther ewith or ancillary thereto; Now, therefore, in pursuance of the Proclamation of Emergency of the fourteenth day of October 1999 and the Provi sional Constitution Order 1 of 1999 and in exercise of all powers en abling him in that behalf, the Chief Executive of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan is pleased to make and promul gate the said Order”.

[10] It provided that the Order shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution or any other law. Under para 3(1), it was provided that upon the office of the President becoming vacant for any reason whatsoever, th e Chief Executive o f the Islamic Republic of Pakistan shall be the President of the Islamic Republic o f Pakistan and shall perform all functions assigned to the President by or under the Constitution or by or under any law.

[11] It was furt her provided that the Chief Executive shall hold office as President until hi s successor enters upon his office. 6. Th e taking over of the government by General Pervez Musharraf, Proclamation of Emergency of the 14thday of October, 1999 and Provisiona l Constitution Order No. 1 of 1999 as ame nded, were challenged before this Cour t under Article 184 (3) of th e Constitution through seve ral petitions, which wer e disposed of by means of the Short Order dated 12thMay 2000 passed in the cas e reported as Syed Zafar Ali Shah v.

[12] General Pervez Musharraf, Chief Executive o f Pakistan (PLD 2000 SC 869). It was held by this Court that on 12th October 1999 a situation arose for which the Constitution provided no solution an d intervention by the Armed Forces through an extra-Constitutional measure becam e inevitable and the said act was validated on the basis of the doctrine of state necessit y and the principle salus populi suprema lex as embodied in Begum Nusrat Bhutto ’s case (PLD 1977 SC 657).

[13] It wa s further held that the 1973 Constitution still remain s supreme law of the land subjec t to the condition that cert ain parts thereof have bee n held in abeyance on account of state necessity. The operati ve part of the Short Orde r reads as follows: - “We accordingly hold as under:- ------- “6.(i) That General Pervez Mush arraf, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee and Ch ief of Army Staff through Proclamation of Emergency dated the 14th October, 1999, followed by PCO 1 of 1999, whereby he has been described as Chief Executive, having validly assumed power by means of an extra-Constitutional step, in the in terest of the State and for the welfare of the people, is entitled to perform all such acts and promulgate all legislat ive measures as enumerated hereinafter, namely:- a) All acts or legislativ e measures which are in accordance with, or coul d have been made under the 1973 Constitution, including the power to amend it; b) All acts which tend to advance or promote the good of the people; c) All acts required to be done for the ordinary orderly running of the State; and d) All such measures as would establish or lead to the establishment of the declared objectives of the Chief Executive. (ii) That constitutional amendments by the Chief Executive can be resorted to only if the Constitution fails to provide a solution for attainment of his declared objectives and further that the power to amend the Constitution by virtue of clause 6 sub-clause (i) (a) ibid is controlled by sub-clauses (b)(c) and (d) in the same clause. (iii) That no amendment shall be made in the sa lient features of th e Constitution i.e. independence of Judiciary, federalism, pa rliamentary form of government blended with Islamic provisions. (iv) That Fundamental Rights provided in Part II, Chapter I of the Constitution shall continue to hold the field but the State will be authorized to make any law or take any executive action in deviation of Article s 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 24 as contemplated by Article 233 (1) of the Constitution, keeping in view the language of Articles 10, 23 and 25 thereof. (v) That these acts, or any of them, ma y be performed or carried out by means o f orders issued by the Chief Executive or through Ordinances on his advice; (vi) That the Superior Courts continue to have the power of judi cial review to judge the validity of any act or action of the Arme d Forces, if challenged, in the light of the principles underlying the law of State necessity as stated above.

[14] Their powers under Article 199 of the Constitution thus remain av ailable to their full extent, and may be exercised as heretofore, notwithstanding a nything to the contrary contained in any legislative instrument enacted by the Chief Executive and/or any order issued by the Chief Executive or by any person or authority acting on his behalf. (vii) That the courts are not merely to determine whether there exists any nexus between the or ders made, proceedings taken and acts done by the Chief Execut ive or by any authority or person acting on his behalf, and hi s declared objectives as spelt out from his speeches dated 13th and 17th October, 1999, on the touchstone of State neces sity but such orders made, proceedings taken and acts done including the legislative measures, shall also be subjec t to judicial review by the superior courts.” 7.

[15] On 9th April 2002, the Chief Executive a nd the President of Pakistan issued Chief Executive’s Order No. 12 of 2002 (hereinafter called the Referendum Order). Articles 3 and 4 of the Re ferendum Order provide as follows: - “3. Referendum .- (1) There shall be a referendum on the 30th day of April 2002, in which every citizen of Pakistan who has attained the age of eighteen ye ars on the date of referendum and possess a National Identity Card issued under the National Database and Registration Author ity Ordinance, 2000 (VIII of 2000), shall be eligible to vote at the referendum: Provided that where a Nation al Identity Card under the National Database and Registra tion Authority Ordinance, 2000 (VIII of 2000) has not been issued, but he is in possession of an identity card validly issued under section 5 of the National Registration Act, 1973 (LVI of 1973), (since repealed), he shall be eligible to cast his vot e on the basis of such identity card. (2) For the purpose of this referendum, the whole of Pakistan shall be a single constit uency and every voter shall be entitled to vote at a po lling station of his choice regardless of his place of residence. (3) The question for referendum shall be as set out in the First Schedule on the ballot paper in Urdu; Provided that in the Provin ce of Sindh, the Commission shall provide a ballot paper pr inted in Sindhi or in Urdu as demanded by the voter. (3) The question shall be answ ered in either “yes” or no” by affixing the stamp pr ovided by the Commission approximately in the appropriate circle printed on the ballot paper. (4) The procedure for holdi ng the referendum shall be as provided in the Second Schedule. 4.

[16] Consequence of the result of referendum.- (1) Notwithstanding anything containe d in the Constitution or any law for the time being in force, if the majority of the votes cast in the referendum are in the affi rmative, the people of Pakistan shall be deemed to have give n the democratic mandate to General Pervez Musharraf to serve the nation as President of Pakistan for a period of five years to enable him, inter alia, to consolidate the reforms and the reconstruction of institutions of State for the establ ishment or genuine and sustainable democracy, including the en trenchment of the local government system, to ensure continued good governance for the welfare of the people, a nd to combat extremism and sectarianism for the security of the State and the tranquillity of society. (2) The period of five years re ferred in clause (1) shall be computed from the first meeting of the Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) to be elected as a result of the forthcoming general election to be held in Octobe r, 2002, in accordance with the Judgment of the Supreme Court.” 8.

[17] The above Consti tution Petitions have been filed in this Court unde r Article 184 (3) of the Constitution challenging the legality and vires of th e Referendum Order on the constitutional plan e as well as on th e touchstone of th e verdict of this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case . Dr. Farooq Hasan, learned AS C appearing in support of C onstitution Petition No.  002 vehemently contended tha t despite the validation of the Procla mation of Emergency and the Provisiona l Constitution Order No. 1 of 1999, the 1973 Constitution sti ll remains the supreme la w of the land as laid down in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case and the powers of the presen t government are strictly circum scribed in the aforesaid case .

[18] According to the learne d counsel, at present the grund norm of the country being the 1973 Constitution and th e judgment of this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case , the vires of the Referendu m Order have to be examined on the touchs tone of the relevant provisions of th e Constitution as well as the law laid down in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case .

[19] In all thes e petitions, a common prayer has been made that the Re ferendum Order be declare d illegal, ultra vires the Constitution and violativ e of the law laid down in Syed Zafa r Ali Shah's case . 9. In Constitution Petition No.  filed by Q azi Hussain Ahmed, Ami r Jamaat-i-Islami and Constitution Petition No.  filed by Syed Zafar Ali Shah' s case Ali Shah, a composite declarati on has been sought to the effect: - • That the Chief Executive ha s unlawfully occupied and taken over the position of the President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan in violat ion of the judgment of this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case; • That Mr.

[20] Muhammad Rafiq Tara r still continues to be the President notwithstanding the Chief Executive’s Order 3 of 2001; • That writ in the nature of quo warranto be issued against the Chief Executive; and • That the holding of referendum fo r election to the office of the President be declared illegal, unconstit utional and violative of the judgmen t of this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case . 10.

[21] Syed Sharifuddin Pir zada, Sr. ASC, Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr. AS C and Syed Iftikhar Hussain Gillani, ASC, le arned counsel appear ing on behalf of th e Federation and Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, l earned Attorney General for Pakista n appearing on Court’s notice, have urged the following points: - (i) The controversy raised in thes e petitions has to be looked into with reference to a long history of the constitu tional crises Pakistan has been going through ever since its coming into existence and the ground realities prevailing in the country particularly in the aftermath of the events of 12 th October 1999, as recognized and validated by this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case ; (ii) General Pervez Musharraf is firmly committed to and bound by the direction of this Court given in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case regarding holding of elections in October 2002, which is clearly established not only fr om his statements within and outside the country, but also from the provi sions of Article 4 (2) of the Referendum Order; (iii) The holding of elections in October 2002 as promised and reiterated before this Court by the learned counsel for the Federation and the learned Attorney General for Pakistan is a step in aid of the transition or the transformation as it would lead to the road towards democracy and rebuilding the institutions of the State, which is a great need of the hour; (iv) Transition and tran sformation of an extra-constitutional set up into a democratic dispensation is the most troubled path and the gap cannot just be covered with one jump; (v) General Pervez Musharraf, ever since the assumption of power, has been performing his functions a nd duties in accordance with the mandate given to him by this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case and has been striving to transform the Army rule into a democratic set up as envisaged in the aforesaid case; (vi) It has been explicitly stated in the Preamble to the Referendum Order that it has been made and promul gated in pursuance of the Proclamation of Emergency of the 14th day of October 1999 and the PCO No. 1 of 1999 and in exercise of all other powers enabling the Chief Executive and President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan in that behalf.; (vii) In the peculiar constitutional history of Pakista n, referendum is a valid means of election to the offi ce of President in Pakistan.

[22] It has also been resorted to in various other countries for the purpose. Referendum is nothing but an appeal to the pe ople of Pakistan, who are the political sove reign of the country; (viii) Nexus between the law, i. e. the Referendum Order and the objects intended to be achieved through it, i.e. the declared objectives of the Chief Executives and transition and transformation to the democratic set up is clearly established in the present case.

[23] The Preamble to the Referendum Order, inter alia , provides as under: - AND WHEREAS, since at that juncture the institutions of State st ood seriously weakened and the democratic and moral authority of the government of the day stood gravely eroded, the Chief Executive of Pakistan announced a 7 – Point Agenda on 17 th October 1999, stating his objectives to rebuild national c onfidence and morale; strengthen the Federation, remove inter-provincial disharmony and restore nati onal cohesion; revive the economy and restore investor confidence; ensure law and order and dispense sp eedy justice; depoliticize state institution; devoluti on of power to the grass roots level; and ensure sw ift and across the board accountability; AND WHEREAS the Chief Executive of Pakistan has emphasised that, inter al ia, appropriate measures will be taken for good govern ance, economic revival, poverty alleviation and pol itical restructuring; AND WHEREAS it is imperative to consolidate the measures taken by the Chie f Executive of Pakistan for the reconstruction of th e institution of state for establishing genuine and su stainable democracy to ensure good governance for an irreversible transfer of power to the peopl e of Pakistan; AND WHEREAS it is essent ial to combat extremism and sectarianism for the s ecurity of the State and tranquillity of society; AND WHEREAS it is in the supreme national interest to obtain a demo cratic mandate from the people of Pakistan thr ough referendum for General Pervez Musharraf to continue to be the President of Pakistan.” (ix) The reform agenda launched by the Chief Executive, being in the interest, welfare a nd prosperity of the pe ople of Pakistan, its achievement and continuity ar e essential for the public good. (x) The Referendum Order does not, in any manner, derogate from the parameters of the extra-consti tutional measure validated by this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case nor does it tantamount to converting the parliamentary system envisaged under the Constitution into presidential form of government in vi ew of the fact that elections to the National a nd Provincial Assemblies and the Senate of Pakistan would be he ld in October 2002 in accordance with the constitutional scheme a nd governments at the federal and provincial levels would be fo rmed accordingly.

[24] The Referendum Order is intra vires the powers given to the Chief Executive by means of the judgment of this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case ; (xi) The Referendum Order has not the effect of amending the 1973 Constitution, therefore, its legality and vires cannot be examined on the touchstone of the verdict of th is Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case and the constitutional pr ovisions relating to holding of referendum; (xii) Mr.

[25] Muhammad Rafiq Tarar cannot be deemed to be continuing to hold the office of the President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the relief in the nature of issuance of writ of quo warranto prayed for in Constitu tion Petitions No. 15 and 22 of 2002 and against the assumpti on of office of President by General Pervez Musharraf under Ch ief Executive’s Order No. 3 of 2001, cannot be granted in these proceedings for the following reasons: - (a) The outgoing President conti nued in office under the PCO 1 of 1999 and was part of the present government for nearly less than two years; (b) He had been performing th e functions and duties of the office of President on and in accordance with the advice of the Chief Executi ve of Pakistan under the new dispensation and was a party to various legislative and executive actions of the present government; (c) He did not launch any prot est when he ceased to hold office; (d) After he ceased to hold the office of President, he accepted the retirement bene fits of that office and thus acquiesced in his ceasing to hold the office; (e) The petition suffers from laches inasmuch as the former President left the office on 20th June 2001 whereas Qazi Hussain Ahmed filed Constitution Petition No.  in this Court on 2nd April 2002, i.e. after a lapse of about 10 months; (f) The issuance of writ of quo warranto is discretionary in nature and as held in Sabir Ali Shah ’s case (PLD 1994 SC 738), such a writ cannot be issued in collateral proceedings. 11.

[26] We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at great length. In view of the peculiar f acts and circumstances of the present case, we are not persuaded to hold that a cas e for issuing the writ of quo warranto prayed for in Constitution Petitions No. 15 and 22 of 2002 ha s been made out. We, therefore, hold that the Chief Executive’s Orders No. 2 and 3 of 2001 have been validly issued by the Chief Executive of Pakistan in exercise of his power s under the Proclamation o f Emergency of the 14th day of October 1999 and the Provisional Constitution Order No. 1 of 1999 as validated by this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case .

[27] Consequently, these petitions qua the issuance of writ of quo warranto are dismissed. 12. As fa r as the legal status of the Refere ndum Order is con cerned, suffice it to say that it has been issued by the Chie f Executive and the Pres ident of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan in exercise of th e powers conferred upon him by this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case while validating the Procla mation of Emergency of the 14th day of October 1999 and th e Provisional Constitution Or der No. 1 of 1999 and it has rightly been conceded by the learned counsel for the respondents that the said Order does not have the effect of am ending the Constitution of Pakistan. 13.

[28] As regards the grounds of challenge to the c onsequences flowing from the holding of referendum unde r the Referendum Order, a pparently these questions are purely academic, hypothetical and presumptive in natu re and are not capable o f being determined at this juncture. Accord ingly, we would not like to go into these questions at this stage and leave the same to be determined at a proper forum at the appropriate time.

[29] Since no relief can be gr anted in these proceedings at this stage, the Constitution Petitions are disposed of being premature. 14. In view of our findings in the above petitions, no order is required to be passed in Civil Petition for Leave to A ppeal No. , which is disposed o f accordingly. CHIEF JUSTICE JUDGE JUDGE JUDGE JUDGE JUDGE JUDGE JUDGE JUDGE Announced in open on 27-4-2002 at Islamabad.