Case No: C.P.L.A.55/2020
Case Title: Public Interest Law Association of Pakistan, Karachi v. Province of Punjab thr. Chief Secretary, Lahore & others
Subject: Writ Petition/.
Judge: Mrs. Justice Ayesha A. Malik
Judgment Date: 02-02-2023
Upload Date: 05-04-2023
Citations: 2023 SCMR 969
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 100
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._55_2020.pdf

[1] order dated 18.11.2019, passed by the Lahore High Court, Lahore, in W.P. No.5 6780 of 2019 ] Public Interest Law Association of Pakistan registered under the Societies Act, 1860 through authorized person Chaudhry Awais Ahmed …Petitioner (s) Versus Province of Punjab through Chief Secretary, Civil Secretariat, Lower Mall, Laho re and others …Respondent (s) For the Petitioner (s) : Mr.

[2] Rafey Alam, ASC Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR For the Respondent(s) : Mr. Qasim Ali Chohan, Addl. A.G. Mr. Ashfaq Ahmed Kharal, Addl. A.G. Noman Sarfraz, Deputy Director (Mines and Minerals) Nawaz Majid, Deputy Director (L) Environment Date of Hearing : 02.02.2023 JUDGMENT AYESHA A. MALIK , J.- This Petition impugns order dated 18.11.2019, passed by the Lahore High Court, Lahore ( High Court ) wherein the Petitioner , in public interest , challenged the lack of environmental approval s for grant of small -scale mining lic ences or lease s.

[3] The issue raised is the grant of small -scale license or lease for mining minor minerals like sand, gravel and sandstone which are issue d without considering the impact on the environment. The Petitioner’s argument is that the Punjab Mining Concession Rules, 2002 (the Rules ) sets out the process for award of small -scale mining licences without requiring any approval by the environmental authority , even though Secti on 12 of the Environmental Protection Act, 1997 ( the Act), requires that all projects need environmental approval from the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

[4] The counsel explained that as CP.55 of 2020 - 2 - per the definitions and the provisions of the Rules , both large scale and small -scale mining operation s are projects for the purposes of Section 12 of the Act. Consequently, as per Section 12 of the Act proponents of projects must obtain environmental approvals from the EPA. 2.

[5] The Respondent s explained that during th e pendency of this dispute , meetings were held to resolve the issue and finally on 27.12.2019, it was agreed that the Mines and Minerals Department (MMD ) shall submit Initial Environmental Examination ( IEE) and Environmental Impact Assessment ( EIA) reports before each project and shall obtain environmental approval for the proje ct as per Section 12 of the Act, p rior to the commencement of the bidding process and issuance of the offer letter to a successful bidder .

[6] This includes small - scale mining license or lease. It was also agreed that this process will be used by the MMD to monitor the terms and conditions of the environmental approval s. Further that the EPA will provide its expertise in monitoring the terms and conditions of the environmental approval s and in the event of any violation they will take action against those who violate the terms and conditions .

[7] Thereafter, p ursuant to Section 33 of the Act , the Punjab Environmental Protection (Review of Initial Environmental Examination and Environmental Imp act Assessment) Regulations, 2022 (Regulations ), was promulgated and notified on 16.12.2022. As per R egulation s No.3, 4 and 5 , it is clearly stipulated as to which project s require an IEE and which require an EIA .

[8] Therefore, they state that the matter in i ssue has been resolved. 3. Counsel for the Petitioner does not dispute the meeting and or the issuance of the Regulations. However, he argues that no steps have been taken to ensure the enforcement of these R egulations as there is no procedure set out to clarify who has to obtain the IEE or E IA for the project s.

[9] He explained that as per practice , once the bidding takes place , the MMD require s the success ful bidder to obtain the necessary environmental approval. He states that this negates the purpose of ob taining the IEE or EIA and is also against the spirit of what was decided on 27.12.2019. As per his contention, there should be guidelines and Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) set out to give clarity and timeline s within which the approval should be obta ined and the terms of the environmental approval should bind the success ful bidder s of the projects so that they abide by it.

[10] CP.55 of 2020 - 3 - 4. Pakistan has the world’s second largest salt mines and coal reserves, fifth largest copper and gold reserves and second large st coal deposits1 with gravel, sand and limesto ne deposits widely distributed i n all four provinces . The country’s GDP owing to mining alone has increased from Rs.309,823 /- million in 2020 to Rs.663,084 /- million in 2021.2 There is huge potential in the mi ning sector for the country’s economy; however, it cannot be achieved at the expense of the environment.

[11] We have examined the Regulations promulgated vide Notification dated 16.12.2022 . As per these Regulations , projects listed in Schedule -I(D) require an IEE which include commercial extraction of sand, gravel, li mestone , clay, sulphur and other mineral s not included in Schedule -III and with a total cost of less than 500 million .

[12] It also includes exploration of coal, go ld, copper, sulphur and precious stone s. Similarly, projects listed in Schedule -II(C) require an EIA which includes mining and processing of coal, gold, copper, sulphur and precious stones . Hence, the R egulations clearly specif y the requirement of an IEE or EIA , which is a fundamental and basi c step before a project starts , so as to ensure that an adverse effect on the environment has been considered and addressed .

[13] This is because even the exploration and min ing of minor mineral s has an adverse impact on the environment , which includes deforest ation, pollution, production of toxic waste water , loss of habitats and disruption of the ecosystem. In particular, with reference to sand mining ; defor estation, loss of biodiversity, soil erosion and acid drainage are some of the serious environment al impacts, which have to be given due consideration.

[14] Surface min ing creates health h azard s for miners and local communities as well as gives rise to air pollution and produces to xic waste water , and causes droughts all of which must be cat ered for. In this cont ext, c limate change is one of the biggest global threats and the combination of surface mining and climate change becomes a serious threat for the ecological system.

[15] Hence, the mining sector must adopt climate proof mining policy3 which must consider how climate change will impact mining areas so that the climate change risks are integrated into the environment assessment.4 Therefore, without an IEE or EIA, these matters are totally neglected. Hence, s pecial attention must be 1Sector Brief Mineral, SMEDA 2Trading Ec onomics: Pakistan GDP from Mining 3Jason Phillips, Climate change and surface mining: A review of environment -human interactions & their spatial dynamics , 74, Applied Geography, 95-108 (2016 ) 4Lukas Ruttinger & Vigya Sharma (2016) Climate Change and Mining : A Foreign Policy Perspective , Germany, adelphi CP.55 of 2020 - 4 - given to all environment al aspects even with refe rence to the mining of minor minerals.5 5.

[16] The relevance of the IEE and EIA cannot be ignored. N ot only do the IEE and EIA consider the environmental impact of the project but can also include standards and initiatives to improve sustainability of the secto r. This can be vital in projects of mining under the MMD. They also prescribe mitigation measures and put in place a monitor ing method through an Environment Management Plan (EMP).

[17] The EMP provides the basic framework for implementin g and managing mitigation and monitor ing measures. It identifies the environment issues, the risks and recommends the required action to manage the impact. This is vital because not only does the miner know what its obligations are , it also gives the MMD and the EPA a framework to follow and to ensure its compliance .

[18] Hence, all factors considered the IEE and EIA ensure that the project is sustainable and all possible environmental consequences have been identified and addressed adequately. 6. In this context, we have examined the Regulations and agree with the contention of the learned counsel for the Petitioner that there is no timeline provided within which the se approval s are to be obtained nor does it specify any process to bind the successful bidder o f the project to the terms of any EMP or other measures provide d for in the IEE or EIA.

[19] However, the Regulations do clarify that the proponent of the project has to obtain the IEE or the E IA and in this case , the proponent of the project will always be the MMD, hence the practice of requiring a successful bidder to obtain an IEE or E IA after bidding of the project totally negates the purpose and impact of these reports.

[20] The impact on the environment must be looked into before bidding commences by the MMD an d at the time of bidding a bidder must know the t erms set out in the IEE or EIA that they are bound by and are required to comply with especially the mitigation measures and the EMP. Hence, it is the MMD that is responsible for obtaining these report s before initiating the process for bidding of the said projects .

[21] In this regard, it would be useful for the MMD to provide guidelines and SOPs to facilitate this process and also provide penalizing provisions within the license or lease for any violation of the EMP so as to ensure compliance . While mining is an essential part of the econom y, it must 5Sustainability 2017 – Review on Environmental Impacts of Sand Exploitation.

[22] CP.55 of 2020 - 5 - be conducted in a responsible and sustainable manner to minimize its impact on the environment. By implementing best practices and adhering to strict guidelines and developing a climate proof mining policy , it can be ensure d that mining continues to provide for the economy while also protecting the health of our planet and its inhabitants.

[23] Economic growth is important but it must be achieved in a way that is sustainab le and respectful of the natural systems that support it . 7. In view of the above, this petition is disposed of. JUDGE Islamabad 02.02.2023 ‘APPROVED FOR REPORTING ’ Mahtab H. Sheikh /Alizeh Akbar * JUDGE