Case No: C.P.L.A.84/2016
Case Title: Sajjad Ahmad Khan v. Muhammad Saleem Ilvi & others
Subject: Suit for Declaration/Others
Judge: Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel
Judgment Date: 20-10-2020
Upload Date: 07-01-2021
Citations: 2021 SCMR 415
SC Citations: 2021 SCP 10
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._84_.2016.pdf

[1] judgment dated 26.10.2015 passed by the Peshawar High Court, Mingo ra Bench (Dar -ul-Qaza) , Swat in C.R.No. 902-M/2012) . Sajjad Ahmad Khan …Petitioner VERSUS Mohammad Saleem Alvi & others …Respondent s For the petitioner : Mr. Naveed Akhtar, ASC Responden ts: Mr. Muhammad Ilyas Siddiqui, ASC (No.2 -3) Date of hearing: 20.10.2020 JUDGMENT MAZHAR ALAM KHAN MIANKHEL, J -.

[2] Petitioner being plaintiff of a suit for specific performance through instant Petition for Leave to Appeal , has questioned the impugned judgment dated 26th October, 2015 ren dered by learned single Judge in Chambers of the Peshawar High Court, Mingora Bench (Dar -ul-Qaza), Swat, whereby the learned Judge while dismissing the civil revision upheld the concurrent findings of the two courts below regarding dismissal of suit of the petitioner. 2.

[3] Learned counsel for the parties were heard and record of the case was perused. C.P. 2 3. It appears from the record that there was an oral sale agreement between Petitioner and Defendant/Respondent No.1 probably on or before 6th August, 1991 when first receipt of earnest money was executed between them and later on an agreement to sell (which itself does not bear any date of execution) . (Agreement ), Ex-PW-, was executed between parties ibid and Petitioner signed the agreement on 16th February, 1992.

[4] The agreement, Ex -PW-, refers to a sale , in lieu of Rs.3,37,500/ - (Rupees three lac thirty seven thousand five hundred) with Responden t No.1 regarding suit property fully described in the agreement and the plaint. Certain amounts of sale consideration were paid in advance and proper receipts were duly executed by Respondent No.1 and Rs.200,000/ - (Rupees two lac) was paid to Responden t No.1 on 24th January, 1992 .

[5] The entire amount of Rs.2,71,000/ - (Rupees two lac seventy one thousand) paid to Respondent No.1 as earnest/advance at different times was duly reflected in the agreement Ex -PW- alongwith the dates. It was also agr eed upon between the parties that the balance sale consideration of Rs.66,500/ - (Rupees sixty six thousand five hundred) would be paid at the time of registration of sale deed.

[6] We may observe that no specific date for completion of the agreement was given. The physical possession of the suit property was also handed over to the petitioner before the execution of agreem ent and this very fact has also been reflected in the agreement Ex-PW- besides being established from the record .

[7] When Responden t No.1 failed to execute a proper sale deed in favour of petitioner, a suit for specific performance was filed by the petitio ner and the same was decreed ex -parte vide judgment and decree dated 18th December, 1997 in favour of petitioner. C.P. 3 4. The other part of the story which appears from the record is that Defendant/ Responden t No.2 (subsequent vendee) (Respondent No.2) filed an application under Section 12(2) of the Code of Civil Procedur e, 1908 (C.P.C.) which was accepted vide order dated 25th November, 2004 and the said order was upheld in appeal.

[8] Resultantly, ex-parte judgment and decree dated 18th December, 1997 ibid was se t aside and an amended plaint was accordingly filed wherein Responden t No.2 was also impleaded as Defendant No.2. Responden t No.1 being vendor and Responden t No.2 being subsequent vendee , filed their joint written statement by alleging an agreement to sell dated 11th February, 1992 (subsequent agreement) by Respondent No.1 in favour of Respondent No.2.

[9] Record of the case further reveals that Respondent No.1 and Respondent No.2 were also locked in a litigation due to this subsequent agreement and ultimately a fresh agreement dated 16th September, 1997 followed by a compromise between them was effected. Accordingly, a decree on the basis of said compromise in favour of Respondent No.2 was passed in the Civil Court of District Rawalpindi (leaving aside the question of territorial jurisdiction and cause of action ).

[10] Thereafter, Responden t No.1 executed a registered deed of general power of attorney in favour of Respondent No.2. Responden t No.2 then transferred the suit property as an attorney in favour of Responde nt No.3 (His Son) through a registered deed bearing No.38 dated 15th January, 2005. The Responden t No.3 after becoming owner of the property filed a suit for possession and permanent injunction against the petitioner and his wife.

[11] This suit by Responde nt No.3 itself establishes the factum of possession of the suit property with the C.P. 4 petitioner. Both the suits (suit for specific performance filed by petitioner and suit for possession filed by Respondent No.3), pending trial were consolidated. After a full -fledged trial, the trial court dismissed both the suits vide its judgment and decree dated 18th August, 2011 .

[12] Two separate appeals filed by plaintiffs of both the suits, were also dismissed by the appellate court vide its judgment and decree dated 14th September, 2012 . The issues regarding alleged subsequent sale in favour of Respondent No.2 and then to Respondent No.3 were decided against Respondents No.2 & 3.

[13] Though Respondent No.3 challenged said findings by way of an appeal but that too was dismissed b y upholding the findings of Trial Court and did not question the same before High Court . So, the findings regarding subsequent sale attained finality against Respondents No.2 & 3. The High Court maintained and upheld the concurrent findings of dismissal of suits and appeals by dismissing the civil revision filed by present petitioner vide impugned judgment.

[14] Responden t No.3 did not question the findings of dismissal of his appeal which attained finality . 5. The main reason which prevailed with the learn ed Judge of the High Court in Chambers was that payment of sale consideration reflected in three different receipts was not proved according to law and witnesses mentioned in the receipts were also not produced and similarly the very agreement (E x-PW-) was also not proved in accordance with the provisions of Article 79 of the Qanun -e-Shah adat Order, 1984 (Q.S.O.,1984) as out of the two attesting witnesses only one witness was produced. 6.

[15] As far as the payment of part of sale consideration through th ree different receipts ibid is concerned , the same as well as C.P. 5 further payment of Rs.200,000/ - (Rupees two lac) on 24th January, 1992 ha s been reflected in the agreement alongwith their respective dates and thereby an amount of Rs.2,71,000/ - (Rupees two lac seventy one thousand) out of total sale consideration of Rs.3,37, 500/- (Rupees three lac thirty seven thousand five hundred ) was admitted to have been received .

[16] Respondent No.1 himself was the author of the agreement. Record reflects that it was an oral agreement to sell when first part payment was paid on 6th August, 1991. Needless to mention here that it is a settled law that a sale/agreement to sell can be oral or offer and acceptance of sale can also be inferred from the acts of the parties to the sale agreement.

[17] We may refer to a judgment dated 9.7.2020 of this court titled Abdul Hameed v. Jahangir Khan passed in Civil Petition No. & Civil Appeal No.) and Muhammad Sattar v. Tariq Javaid (2017 SCMR 98) and this question has very well been dealt with in the above judgments . Respondent No.1 though in his joint written statement has alleged the agreement and his signatures over the same as fake and fictitious but has not specifically challenged the agreement in question either by way of criminal proceedings or through a civil suit.

[18] Simple denial of a document being fake and fictitious is not legally sufficient unless the same facts are proved and established on the record. Possession of the petitioner at the sit e has also been admitted even by Respondent No.3, in his suit, in the shape of some sort of constructions made by the petitioner.

[19] Respondent No.1 even disappeared from the scene and left the Respondent s No.2 & 3 to contest the suit with petitioner. He even did not appear as a witness to rebut the material brought against him what to talk of proving his allegations against the petitioner . C.P. 6 7. As far as non -appearance of the second attesting witness of the agreement, Ex -PW-, is concerned, that has undispu tedly been brought on the record that the other witness, Dr.

[20] Fazal Sher Khan was not available and was residing in America . The provisions of Article 79 (Q.S.O., 1984 ), are applicable only in those cases where execution of a document is disputed between mak er of document and the person in whose favour purportedly the same is executed. Here in this case, execution of the agreement Ex -PW-, though has been denied and disputed by Respondent No.1 by filing his joint written statement but mere denial would not be sufficient in presence of plethora of overwhelming evidence on the record.

[21] Such an evidence cannot be discarded merely for non -production /appearance of second marginal witness. The prime and foremost requirement of Article 79 (Q.S.O. ,1984 ) is to prove e xecution of a document in case of a denial of execution by producing two marginal witness es. When the allegation goes un -rebutted that Respondent No.1 himself was the author/scrib e of the document.

[22] When again un -rebutted fact is there on the record that th e other witness being abroad was not capable of giving evidence , when the stance of Notary Public regarding attestation of agreement goes un-shattered , when PW -1, Hamayoon Shinwari not only confirms the execution rather gives each and every detail of the t ransaction between petitioner and Respondent No.1 and PW-4 is also the witness of execution and the entire evidence supported by the petitioner himself then in the given circumstances mere non -production of other attesting witness of Ex -PW- being not av ailable would be nothing much less a hyper technicality and not the violation of Article 79 ibid.

[23] We may observe that concurrent findings of dismissal of suit by the three courts are a bitter and C.P. 7 distressing example of misreading and non -reading of materia l evidence available on the record and misapplication of law . 8. We in the circumstances are left with no option but to convert this petition into appeal and allow the same with costs.

[24] The concurrent findings of the three courts below dismissing the sui t of petitioner are set -aside. 9. By keeping in mind the conduct of Responden t No.1, we hereby decree the suit of petitioner for specific performance of agreement to sell Ex -PW- in lieu of Rs.3,37,500/ - (Rupees three lac thirty seven thousand five hu ndred) out of which Rs.2,71,000/ - (Rupees two lac seventy one thousand) have already been paid to the Responden t No.1.

[25] Balance of Rs.66,500/ - (Rupees sixty six thousand five hundred) be deposited in the trial court within sixty (60) days from tod ay. Needle ss to mention that the alleged subsequent sale of suit property in favour of respondent No.2 and then in favour of respondent No.3 being sham transactions are hereby cancelled and the same will have no adverse effects on the rights of the petitioner.