Case No: C.P.L.A.140-L/2015
Case Title: Malik Ubaidullah v. Government of the Punjab through Secretary Education, Lahore, etc
Subject: Service/Appointments
Judge: Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah
Judgment Date: 14-07-2020
Upload Date: 13-08-2020
Citations: PLD 2020 SC 599
SC Citations: 2020 SCP 172
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._140_l_2015.pdf

[1] order of Lahore High Court dated 02.12.2014, passed in ICA No. 3) Malik Ubaidullah ...….Petitioner Versus Government of Punjab , etc. …….Respondent s For the Petitioner : Mr. Ishtiaq A. Ch. Advocate High Court appeared with permission of the Court a/w petitioner For the respondents: Mr. S.N. Khawar , Addl.

[2] A.G. Mr. Asif Mahmood Cheema, Add. A.G. a/w Tariq Habib, DEO/D.R. Date of hearing: 14.07.2020 JUDGEMENT Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J.- The Petitioner applied for the post of S enior Elementary Sc hool Educator Arabic (“SESE [Arabic ]”) on the disability quota ("Disability Q uota") in pursuance to the advertisement put out by the Education Department, Local Government, Multan.

[3] According to the advertisement , in addition to the other posts, a total of 81 posts of SESE [Arabic] were advertised with 42 posts in female category and 39 posts in the male category at the Girls and Boys s chools, respectively. Thereafter, only one Mst. Asma Qasim was appointed against the said post under the Disability Quota and the petitioner failed to secure a position .

[4] Admittedly, Mst. Asma Qasim with 62.78 Marks topped the merit list for the post of SESE [Arabic] under the Disability Q uota a nd the petitioner with 43.53 Marks could not be offered a post . Aggrieved of not being offered a place, C.P. No.140 -L of 2015 2 the petitioner challenged the selection process under Disability Quota before the High Court by invoking its constitutional jurisdiction .

[5] His writ petit ion was dismissed vide order dated 28.10.201 3 and so did his appeal before the High Court (ICA) vide impugned order dated 01.12.2014. 2. After hearing the parties and having gone through the record, the legal question that arises in this case is the manne r of allocation of 2% Disability Q uota for employment under the Disabled Persons (Employment and Rehabilitation) Ordinance, 1981 ("Ordinance") .1 The Ordinance requires that 2% of the total number of persons employed by an establishment at any time shall be “disabled persons ".2 In order to fully understand the allocation mechanis m of the Disability Q uota under the Ordinance, it would be useful to first understand the concept of Disability and the importance of role of employment in the lives of persons with disabilities (“ PWDs ”) as compared to persons without disabilities .

[6] CONCEPT OF DISABILITY 3. Disability means lacking one or more physical powers, such as the ability to walk or to coordinate one's movements, as from the effects of a disease or accident, or through mental impairment.3 According to the UN Convention on the Rights Of Persons With Disabilities ("CRPD " or " Convention ") ratified by Pakistan in 20 11, persons with disabilities include those who have long-term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairments which in interaction with various barriers may hinder their full and effective participation in society on an equal basis with others.

[7] Medical and Social model 4. There are two main thread s to the concept of disability: the medical model and the social model . Both models regard disability as a difficult predicament commonly faced by people; however, while the medical model looks at disability as a 1 The Federal Law is now a Provincial Law after the Disabled Persons (Employment & Rehabilitation) (Amendment) Act, 2012, however, as this case pertains to a period before 2012, therefore, the Federal Law would apply in the present case. 2 As described in the statute.

[8] The more socially acceptable term is persons with disabilities or persons with different abilities. 3 Collins Dictionary – complete and unabridged, 12th edition 2014. C.P. No.140 -L of 2015 3 condition requiring medical intervention, the social model looks at it as a condition that requires the transformation of societal attitudes and state policies .4 The medical model views disability as an impairment due to various health related factors which can be identified and eradicated through medical treatment .5 While the social model identifies systemic barriers, negative attitudes and exclusion by soci ety and argues that societal attitudes and environment are the main barriers for people with disabilities. 5.

[9] The social model argues that D isability is the loss or limitation of opportunities to participate in activities – social, economic and political – on an equal footing with those with no impairments. "Disability is the outcome of an oppressive relationship between people with impairments and the rest of society ".6 It has been argue d that society is the cause of disability and reject the idea of it being a personal tragedy.7 6.

[10] The social and ec onomic inclusion of p eople with disabilities in development has not been realized, despite the fact that disability belongs to the socio -economic development ag enda. There is a reluctance to consider disability from the viewpoint of investment . Human capital development such a s education and employment are among the most important factors for inclusion and economic empowerment.

[11] When these factors are made inclusive and accessible to persons with disabilities, it not only leads to an improvement in their livelihoods but also imp roves the prospects of their families and of society as a whole .8 Disability is thus not just a health problem. It is a complex phenomenon, reflecting the interaction between features of a person's body and features of the society in which he or she lives .9 4 Silvers, Anita . 2010. ‘An Essay on Modeling: The Social Model of Disability.’ In Philosophical Reflections on Disability, Philosophy and Medicine, 104, edited by Christopher D.

[12] Ralston, and Justin Ho. Berlin: Springer. 5 Oliver, Mike . 1983. Social Work with Disabled Pe ople. Basingstoke: Macmillan & 1990. The Politics of Disablement: A Sociological Approach. London: Macmillan. 6 Finkelstein, Victor . 1980. Attitudes and Disabled People. New York: World Rehabilitation Fund. 7 Oliver, M., and C.

[13] Barnes , 1998. Disabled people and socially. From exclusion to inclusion – London LPC Group 8 Kamal Lamichhane . Disability, Education and Employment in Developing Count ries- From charity to investment. Cambridge University Press. 2005 9 World Health Organization (2016). See http://www.who.int/topics/disabilities/en/ C.P.

[14] No.140 -L of 2015 4 Employment for persons with disabilities 7. According to International Labour Organization (ILO) an estimated 386 million of the world's working -age are PWDs. The unemployment among the PWDs is as high as 80 per cent in some countries. Often employers a ssume that persons with d isabilities are unable to work.

[15] In Pakistan, estimates of the number of persons living with disabilities vary bet ween 3.3 million and 27 million.10 8. Employment is equally important to all people , without it, social inclusion and economic independence are unlikely to be achieved. Among the crucial social functions that employment can facilitate are financial independence and social inclusion.

[16] It has also been found to improve social status, provide social support and enable workers to make a contribution, thereby leading to an increase in self -worth11. Employment has the potential to improve a person’s financial situation, open up opportunities for social contact, build (new) friendships and increase people’s self -esteem.

[17] By contrast , unemployment can cause not only poverty and social exclusion but also result in a lower sense of self -worth. The effect s of unemployment on physical health like symptoms of so matization disorder, depression and anxiety were signif icantly greater in unemp loyed than employed individuals .12 The situation for people with disabilities may have consequences of a greater extent as they tend to be looked upon as dependents of their families and relatives and are not expected to be gainfully employed or independent .

[18] Work has been, and will undoubtedly continue to be, central to all human societies. 9. One of the major difficulties faced by persons with disabilities is that employers have the erroneous assumption that these people will probably underperform in most areas of their duties – something which is actually not the case.

[19] Another 10 Moving from the margin – Mainstreaming persons with disabilities in Pakistan. British Council & The Eco nomist Intelligence Unit - 2014 11 O’Day, B., and M. Killeen . 2002. ‘Does U.S. Federal Policy Support Employment and Recovery for People with Psychiatric Disabilities?’ Behavioral Sciences and the Law 20: 559 –83. 12 Linn, M.

[20] W., R. Sandifer, and S. Stein . 1985. ‘Effects of Unemployment on Mental and Physical Health.’ American Journal of Public Health 75 (5): 502 –06. C.P. No.140 -L of 2015 5 plausible issue is that when the majority of workplaces are not made accessible to people with disabilities, employers may feel that they will have to make an unwarranted investment to provide facilities for people with disabilities, and some do not believe in the employment potential of such people .13 Rights based approach towards disability 10.

[21] The paradigm in disability has shifted from charity to investment, exclusion to inclusion and sympathy to rights -based approach towards disability.14 Disabled people initially were not considered worthy of any rights. The disabled were treated as abnormal or different from society, and thus needed to be given medical treatment under th e medical model.

[22] Under the social model, disability is explained as a condition created by society and the environment, and not the result of an individual's impairment. The human rights model or right s-based model embodies the values or principles of dign ity, respect, equality, and social justice to the disabled. The UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities of 2006 (“CRPD” or “Convention” ) created a binding framework for the right s-based m odel of disability law.

[23] Disabled persons by virtue of being a human have the right to enjoy li fe, liberty, equality, security and dignity .15 11. In Pakistan, policy approaches to disability have largely been focused on rehabilitation, welfare handouts and related charity. This has been changing since CRPD, which Pakistan ratified in 2011, but progress around building an inclusive society has been woefully slow.

[24] The Convention, which became operational in 2008, is the first human rights treaty of the 21st century and the first UN treaty protecting the fundamental rights of persons with disability. In line with the general discourse 13 Ewa Giermanowska , Mariola Racaw , Dorota Szawarska - Employing People with Disa bilities, Palgrave, Macmillan, 2020 14 Kamal Lamichhane .

[25] Disabi lity, Education and Employment in Developing Countries - From charity to investment. Cambridge University Press. 2005 15 Tushti Chopra , ‘Expanding the Horizons of Disability Law in India: A Study from a Human Rights Perspective’ (2013) 41 J.L. Med. & Ethics 807 C.P. No.140 -L of 2015 6 around development -related issues today, the treaty is a move towards viewing disability from a rights -based approach .16 12.

[26] CRPD works to promote and protect the human rig hts of people with disabilities. W ith Article 27 explicitly recognizing their right to work on an equal basis w ith others. The same article further emphasizes the opportunity to gain a living by work freely chosen or accepted in a labour market and work environment that is open, inclusive and accessible to people with disabilities.

[27] CRPD also prohibits all forms of employment discrimination, promotes access to vocational training, promotes opportunities for self - employment and calls for reasonable accommodation in the workplace. The new dimension in the treatment of persons with disabilities, which the Convention san ctions, is the departure from the perception of people with disabilities as “objects” of mer cy, treatment and social protec tion, to the perception of disabled people as “subjects” possessing rights, which they are able to claim, make decisions and be activ e members of society.

[28] This legal act is based on values arising from fundamental human rights. It guarantees people with disabilities equal access to institutions and the possibility of pursuing social activities and fulfilling the roles on the same princi ples as those who are able -bodied .17 DISABILITY AND OUR CONSTITUTION 13.

[29] Our Constitution, as a whole, does not distinguish between a person with or without disabilities. It recognizes inherent dignity of a human being; equal and inalienable rights of all the peop le as the foundation of freedom, justice and peace. Every person is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth therein, w ithout distinction of any kind.

[30] It, therefore, applies equally to persons with disa bilities, guaranteeing them full enjoyment of their fundamental rights without discrimination. The triangular construct of the right to life, dignity and equality under the Constitution provides a robust platform for mainstreaming 16 Moving from the margin – Mainstreaming persons with disabilities in Pakistan.

[31] British Council & The Economist Intelligence Unit - 2014 17 Cotter, Anne M . 2007. This Ability: An International Legal Analysis of Disability Discrimination. Aldershot, Hamps hire: Ashgate. C.P. No.140 -L of 2015 7 persons with disabilities .18 “The purpose of the constitutional right to human dignity is to realize the constitut ional value of human dignity; to realize a person's humanity; his free will; the freedom to shape his life and fulfill himself.

[32] It is a person's freedom to write his li fe story .”19 Such vibrancy and vitality is the hallmark of a living constitution in a democracy .20 2% DISABILITY QUOTA – HOW TO BE WORKED OUT. 14. Understanding Disability and the importance of employment for PWDs, we now examine the relevant provision of the Ordinance.

[33] The pre ambular statement of the law is that it is an Ordinance to provide for the employment, rehabilitation and welfare of PWDs . Section 10 of the Ordinance provide s as under :- 10. Establishments to employ disabled persons .21 (1) Not less than two percent of the total number of persons employed by an establishment at any time shall be disabled persons whose names have been registered with the Employment Exchange of the area in which such establishment is located and against whose names in the register maintained under section 12 an endorsement exists to the effect that they are fit to work. (2) The disabled persons employed against any post in pursuance of subsection (1) shall be entitled to the terms and conditions which are not less favour able than those of the other persons employed by the establishment against similar posts. (3) When calculating the percentage of the posts in an establishment for the purposes of employment of disabled persons, the fraction of 0.5 and above shall count as a whole number. (emphasis supplied) Section 10 of the Ordinance provides that not less than 2% of the total number of persons employed by an establishment at any time shall be PWDs .

[34] The total number of persons employed means the total sanctioned posts22 of the esta blishment , i.e., an Organization, Authority, D epartment or Ministry . 2% of the total sanctioned posts or workforce of the establishment becomes the Disability Quota for the establishment . Every establishment ha s a variety of 18 see Junaid Mahmood v.

[35] Government of Punjab (PLD 2017 Lahore 1) 19 Aharon Barack - Human Dignity - The Constitutional Value and the Constitutional Right, Cambridge 2015 p.144. 20 See: Pakistan Tobacco Co. Ltd. and others v. Government of N. W.F.P. through Secretary Law and others (PLD 2002 SC 460) and Reference No. (Reference by the President of Pakistan under Article 186 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973) (PLD 2013 SC 279). 21 Phrase "disabled persons" is not ap proved should be persons with disabilities.

[36] See Barrister Asfandyar Khan Tareen, etc. v. Govt. of the Punjab, etc. (PLD 2018 Lahore 300 ) 22 See: Sajjad Ali v. Vice -Chancellor through Registrar University of Malakand at Chakdara, Dir Lower and others (2020 PLC (C.S.) 235). C.P. No.140 -L of 2015 8 posts with differen t qualifications; job descriptions and skill set s.

[37] Appointments to these posts are based on different selection criteria and separate merit lists . The mechanism for appointment against 2% Disability Quota is also to work side by side with the general recruitment process for every category of posts . Therefore, the total Disability Quota for the establishment is further apportioned and allocated against the sanctioned strength of various category of posts which have a separate selection criteria .

[38] For exa mple in the instant case the Disability Quota in the respondent Education Department is as follows, including the Disability Quota for the post of SESE [Arabic] : CADRE WISE POSTS - 2009 SR. # POST SANCTION 2% DISABILITY QUOTA 1 SSE/SST 1326 27 2 EST/SESE (Arts, Science) 1699 34 3 EST (OT) 299 6 4 EST (ARABIC) 252 5 5 EST (DM) 159 3 6 EST (Phy) 291 6 7 ESE/PST 5900 118 8 NON TEACHING POSTS 2306 46 TOTAL Sanctioned Posts 12,232 245 15.

[39] There may arise a situation where the posts in a particular category are less than 50, in that case it will be upto the establishment to allocate Disability Quota to respect ive categories C.P. No.140 -L of 2015 9 of posts even th ough they are less than 50 posts in a particular category in order to maintain the overall Disability Quota of the establishment.

[40] It may also be the case that a particular category of posts in an establishment may not be fit for a person with disability, in that case the establishment may shift the Disability Quota to posts which are fit for PWDs. The prime objective is to maintain a 2% Disability Quota within the establishment and it is for the establishment to allocate the posts against respective categories in case they are less than 50 in a parti cular category or not suited to PWDs .23 16.

[41] The Allocation of 2% Disability Quota on th e basis of the advertised posts as compared to the sanctioned posts is adverse to the interest of the PWDs for the reasons that 2% Disability Quota can only be actualize d if there is a minimum of 50 posts advertised to secure one post for the PWDs. If the advertisement is for less than 50 posts (due to the vacancies arising at that particular time) , Disability Quota on the basis of the advertised posts cannot be worked o ut, depriving the PWDs of their prospect of employment .

[42] This can go on for a longtime as posts are adv ertised as per vacancies which vary from time to time, therefore , if Disability Quota were to be based on the advertised posts, the fate of the PWDs would continue to hang in the balance and remain uncertain unless the posts advertised happen to be above 50.

[43] It is, therefore , in the interest of the PWDs that the Disability Quota for the establishment is first worked out on the basis of the total sancti oned posts and then apportioned against the total sanctioned strength of different categories of posts. Thereafter , the posts can be successively filled as and when the vacancies arise through advertisement , keeping the total Disability Quota in mind rathe r than the number of posts advertised . 17.

[44] In the present case the posts advertised for SES E [Arabic] we re 81 which allows for one post in the Disability Quota , while if the Disability Quota is worked out on the total sanctioned strength of the posts of SESE [Arabic] it comes to 5 posts (see chart above) and 4 more PWDs could have been appointed against the said posts against the advertisement in question .

[45] Filling the 23 TYH-2020 C.P. No.140 -L of 2015 10 Disability Quota on the basis of advertised posts is , therefore, detrimental to the interest and welfare of the persons with disabilities ; is against the letter of the law and offends the ir fundamental right to life and livelihood and their right to dignity. 18.

[46] Summarizing the above we hold that: (i) The 2% (and now 3%)24 Disability Quota is to be calculated on the basis of the total sanctioned post s of the establishment. (ii) In order to ensure fair and equitable representation of persons with disabilities (PWDs) in every t ier of the establishment, the total Disability Quota is to be further apportioned and allocated amongst different categories of posts in the establishment.

[47] The determination of different categories is on the basis of their distinct qualifications, selectio n criteria and separate merit list. (iii) In case the sanctioned strength of a post is less than 50, it will be for the establishment to allocate seat(s) from the overall Disability Quota against such a post (iv) if a particular post is not fit for a PWD, the establishment may shift the Disability Quota and adjust it against another pos t in the establishment so that the overall Disability Quota is not disturbed and maintained at all times. (v) The advertisement for any category of post must clearly provide the total Disability Quota for that category of posts and the number of seats vacant under the said Disability Quota at the time of the advertisement .

[48] Use of inappropriate and insensitive words 19. It is also observed that words like “disabled ,” “physically handicapped ” and "mentally retarded " deeply bruise and offend human dignity of persons with different abilities. The Federal Government and the Provincial Governments a re directed to discontinue the use of these wor ds in official correspondence, directives, notifications and circulars and shift to “persons with disabilities” or “persons with different abilities” .

[49] The view taken by the Lahore High Court in Barrister Asfandyar Khan case25 is approved and must be given effect to. 24 After the Disabled Persons (Employment & Rehabilitation) (Amendment) Act, 2012 25 Barrister Asfandyar Khan Tareen, etc. v. Govt. of the Punjab, etc. (PLD 2018 Lahore 300 ) C.P. No.140 -L of 2015 11 Employment is half the story 20.

[50] Appointing persons with disabilities under Disability Quota of 2% is half the story. The other half and perhaps the more important half is to provide the infrastructure, access , sup port, and facilities , so that persons with disabilities, once appointed to a post, can perform their job without feeling physically or emotionally incapacitated in any manner.

[51] The biggest barriers to the employment of persons with disabilities is the acces sibility and their social acceptability at the workplace. The Government and the concerned establishment is bound to make provisions for it, for otherwise, the Disability Quota and the purpose of the Ordinance will stand frustrated and serve no useful purpose.

[52] This support and facilitation for persons with disabilities has been recognized a s Reasonable Accommodation under the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) that Pakistan has ratified in 2011 . It means necessary and appropriate modification and adjustments where needed in a particular case to ensure persons with disabilities the enjoyment on an equal basis with others of all human r ights and fundamental freedom s. 21.

[53] It is elaborated that Reasonable A ccommodation can be through assistive technology, which is an umbrella term that includes assistive, adaptive, and rehabilitative devices for people with disabilities . Assistive technology promotes greater independence by enabling PWDs to perfo rm tasks that they were formerly unable to accomplish, or had great difficulty accomplishing, by providing enhancements to, or changing methods of interacting with, the technology needed to accomplish such tasks .26 The Convention provides that no one can be discriminated on the ground of disability and obligates the State to take steps to provide Reasonable A ccommodation in order to provide inclusion and access to persons with disabilities in the society .

[54] Relief 22. In the present case the Disability Quota for 252 posts27 of SESE [Arabic] is 5 posts but only one post out of this 26 Dr. K. Thiyagu , Assistive Technology & Inclusive Education, Laxmi Book Publications, 2014 27 In the year 2009 C.P. No.140 -L of 2015 12 Disability Quota has been filled by Mst.

[55] Asma Qasim. Therefore, respondents are directed to reconsider the case of the petitioner , preferably alongwith the other applicants with disab ilities who had applied for the said posts (if they can be reached out) and fill the Disability Quota for SESE [Arabic] only if petitioner and other applicants (if any) meet the selection criteria fixed for the said post.

[56] Let this exercise be completed wit hin a period of one month from the receipt of this judgment through a speaking order . For the above reasons the impugned orders of the High Court are set aside. This petition is converted into an appeal and allowed in the above terms. Lahore , 14th July, 2020 . Iqbal Approved for reporting Judge Judge Judge