Case No: C.P.13/2023
Case Title: Supreme Court Bar Association, through its Vice-President, Islamabad and others v. Pakistan Bar Council, through its Secretary, Islamabad and another
Subject: U/A 184(3)
Judge: (1) Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar (2) Mrs. Justice Ayesha A. Malik
Judgment Date: 05-05-2023
Upload Date: 05-05-2023
Citations: NA
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 130
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/const.p._13_2023.pdf

[1] ORDER Muhammad Ali Mazhar , J. This constitution petition has been brought by the Supreme Co urt Bar Association (“SCBA ”) and others under Article 184(3) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (“Constitution ”) for challenging the show cause notices dated 12.4.2023, issued by Pakistan Bar Council (“PBC”) to Muqtedir Akhtar Sh abbir, Secretary, SCBA (petitioner No.2) and Malik Shakeel -ur-Rehman, Additional Secretary, SCBA (petitioner No.3).

[2] The petition was fixed for preliminary hearing on 05.05.2023 when Mr. Abid S. Zuberi, learned ASC, referred to Rule 118 and 125 of the Pakis tan Legal Practitioner s & Bar Council Rules, 1976 and argued that , after filing this petition, the notification of de -seating was also issued which is illegal and without due process of law.

[3] The learned counsel was also directed to satisfy this Court on th e maintainability of this petition under Article 184(3) of the Constitution , which predominantly relates to the question of public importance with reference to the enforcement of any of the fundamental rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part -II of the Consti tution. 2.

[4] In response to the notices issued to the respondents , as well as the learned Attorney General fo r Pakistan (“AGP”), Mr. Mansoor Awan, learned AGP is present, whereas Mr. Ahsan Bhoon, learned ASC representing the PBC, appeared via video link fr om Lahore . 3. The learned representatives of PBC argued that the petition under Article 184(3) of the Constitution is not maintai nable.

[5] It was further averred that the action of de -seating was taken in accordance with the law. They have also expressed discomfort due to some derogatory remarks and language allegedly used by the SCBA against the PBC in some letters or correspondence. The Court then asked all the learned representative s of the PBC and the SCBA whether there is any possibility to find a middl e way for the amicable resolution of the disputes cropped up between the two eminent and distinguished Bars of th is country .

[6] In response, Mr. Hassan Raza Pasha, learned Chairman of the Executive Committee , PBC, inform ed us that a meeting was convened with Mr. Abid S. Zuberi, learned President of SCBA , with the proficient endeavors and mediation of Mr. Shamim -ur-Rehman, Ex-President SCBA and Syed Const.P. No.  3 Qalb-e-Hassan, learned ASC and all the participants of the meeting made their best possible efforts in good faith for the settlement of the dispute s between the two representative bodies of the legal fraternity.

[7] Mr. Hamid Khan, learned Sr. ASC, and Mr. Abid S. Zuberi, learned ASC also confirm ed the statement made by Mr. Hasan Raza Pasha, learned ASC, Syed Qalb -e-Hass an, learned ASC and Mr. Haroon -ur-Rashid, learned ASC/ Vice Chairman PBC . The learned AGP is also of the view that it would be in the interest of both the representative bodies of lawyers to resolve the dispute s in a friendly way rather than litigating in t he Courts. 4.

[8] The elected representative s of PBC and SCBA have conveyed their proposals in Court for agreement/ settlement and, after due deliberation and thoughtful consideration , they consensually reached to an amicable settlement with certain decisions in the following terms: i. The show cause notices dated 12.04.2023 issued by PBC to Muqtedir Akhtar Shabbir, Secretary , SCBA (petitioner No.2) and Malik Shakeel -ur-Rehman, Additional Secretary, SCBA (petitioner No.3) are withdrawn with immediate effect.

[9] As a consequence thereof, the de -seating notifications of aforesaid two petitioners dated 04.05.2023 are also withdrawn forthwith . ii. As a reciprocal gesture, Mr. Abid S. Zuberi, the President SCBA, undertakes that , within one week, an application under Order XXIII, Rule 1 , Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall be moved with an urgent motion for the withdrawal of Suit No. 23, - and - filed by the SCBA against the PBC and its m embers in the Sindh High Court and certified true cop ies of the orde rs of withdrawal of the above suits shall be provided with covering letter to the PBC Sec retariat for information and record . iii.

[10] The minutes of both meetings dated 24.02.2023 , convened at 11:30 a.m. and 7:00 p.m , are hereby cancelled . However, both the elec ted bodies of SCBA and PBC are at liberty to convene their meetings in accordance with the relevant Rules/byelaws . iv. The President of SCBA also inform ed us that Ms. Hifza Bukhari, Finance Secretary , SCBA made a request in writing to Habib Bank limited, Supreme Court Branch, Islamabad, for freezing the bank accounts of SBCA .

[11] She undertakes that she will withdraw the letter by 10.5.2023 and a copy of withdrawal letter with the acknowledgment of Bank shall be provided in the SCBA Secretariat for information an d record . v. Our attention was also invited to a R esolution dated 04.05.2023, circulated by Ms. Hifza Bukhari, Acting Secretary/Finance Secretary SCBA, whereby the membership s of seven Members of the SCBA was Const.P.

[12] No.  4 suspended. Since the matter has been resolved , therefore the representative s of both the parties , as well as all the Members of SCBA who passed the resolution and are present in Court have agreed to withdraw the aforesaid resolution with immediate effect. vi. The letter dated 05.05.2023, issued by the Off ice Secretary of PBC to Mr.

[13] Ashfaq Ahmed Raja, Admin Officer, Mr. Husnain, Assistant Admin Officer, and Mr. Ghalib Hussain, Accountant (all employees of SCBA ) is also withdrawn. vii. The letter dated 04.05.2023, issued by the Secretary SCBA, whereby the member ship of ten Members of the Executive Committee was suspended is also withdrawn forthwith. viii.

[14] The elected representatives of PBC and SCBA all have assured each other that they will follow this settlement and the mutually agreed decisions contained in paragrap hs (i) to (vii) in letter and in spirit , without committing any breach thereof. 5. The Constitution P etition is disposed of in the above terms . 6.

[15] In the end, we must appreciate the elected representatives of PB C and SCBA , along with their well -wisher s from both sides , who made sincere efforts in good faith with sanity to find out the ways and means for proper resolution of the disputes and finally resolved it prudently . We expect that in future also, both renowned associations will maintain a cordial relationship and perform their duties and responsibilities in accordance with the law and the applicable rules/byelaws for safeguarding and advocating the interest s of their members and the betterment of the legal fraternity as a whole , in a congenial environment , during the pleasure of their offices and elected mandate .