Case No: C.P.L.A.1975/2019
Case Title: Gul Nawaz & others v. Rashid Ahmed & others
Subject: Suit for Declaration/.
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa
Judgment Date: 02-02-2021
Upload Date: 11-02-2021
Citations: 2021 SCMR 529
SC Citations: 2021 SCP 44
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._1975_2019.pdf

[1] judgment dated 25.02.2019 of the Peshawar High Court, Bannu Bench passed in CR No. 104-B/2015 ) Gul Nawaz & others Petitioner s Versus Rashid Ahmed & others Respondent s For the Petitioner s : Mr. Salahuddin Malik, ASC Mr. Mehmood Ahmed Sheikh, AOR For the Respondent s : Not represented Date of Hearing : 02.02.2021 ORDER Qazi Faez Isa, J .

[2] A suit for specific performance was filed by the petitioners who alleged that they ha d entered into an agreement to sell dated 30 April 2009 with the respond ents for the sale of certain lands . The petitioners were required to lead evidence in support of their claim which they failed to do despite being granted a number of opportunities; resultantly their side was closed and the learned Judge of the Trial Court dismiss ed their suit.

[3] The petitioners challenged the decision by filing an appeal , which was dismissed and so too the revision filed by them before the High Court . Therefore , it is against three concurrent judgments that the instant petition has been file d. 2. The learned counsel says that the petitioners were not given sufficient opportunity to lead evidence before closing their side and dismiss ing their suit .

[4] The learned counsel has referred to the order sheet s of the Trial Court, which have been filed through CMA No.  . 3. The Trial Court’s order dated 3 October 2012 refers to an application of the petitioners whereby they sought the Court’s permission to prove the ‘Iqrar Nama , [agreement] through CP  2 secondary evidence ’ because its original was stated to be with the defendants (respondents herein) .

[5] We asked the learned counsel to refer to the second ary evidence sought to be produced , that is the copy of the said Iqrar Nama , however, the learned counsel state s that the same was not an Iqrar Nama but a decision dated 30 April 2009. 4. The petitioners had relied on an Iqrar Nama (agreement) but later stated that the document was instead a decision .

[6] Leaving aside the question whether they could change their stance so fundamentally , we have examined the referred to document which is a ‘decision’ issued by the “Emarat -e-Islami Taliban , Waziristan wa Afghanistan ” (‘Taliban ’). The Taliban had no legal authority to decide cases . The Taliban infiltrated into Pakistan and by mid - 2005 had illegally occup ied and assume d control over a part of the territory of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan , including parts of Waziristan .

[7] Pakistan is a sovereign country and the applicable law of Pakistan applies over every inch of its territory . Every square inch o f the territor y of Pakistan is pre cious and must be kept free and safe. 5. The physical possession of any part of the territory of Pakistan taken over by the Taliban contravened the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan ( ‘Constitution ’) and any decision given by the Taliban would be unconstitutional, unlawful and of no legal effect.

[8] Subverting the Constitution and subjugating the people does not confer legitimacy on an aggressor nor renders an aggressor’s decisions constitutionally legitimate. The learned counsel’s attempt to alternative ly categorise the purported ‘decision’ as an agreement is also not permissible because it undermine s the sovereignty of Pakistan .

[9] The purported agreement is ‘forbidden’, ‘unlawful’ and opposed to ‘public policy’ in terms of section 23 of Contract Act, 1872 , therefore , it is of no legal effect. 6. The learned Judge of the Trial Court ha d provided a number of opportunities to the petitioners to lead evidence but they had repeatedly failed to do so and failed to establish the su bsistence of an agreement between them selves and the respondents .

[10] We have also considered the submission that if the petitioner s were CP  3 permitted to produce the ‘decision’ / ‘agreement’, they would have succeeded. However, as stated above, the purported ‘dec ision’ / ‘agreement’ , could n either be made the basis of a suit nor relied upon. Therefore , leave to appeal is declined and consequently this petition is dismissed.