Case No: C.R.P.210/2015
Case Title: Secretary Govt. of Punjab Finance Department, Lahore v. Muhammad Maqbool Elahi & others
Subject: Service/Pension
Judge: Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja
Judgment Date: 22-07-2015
Upload Date: 23-07-2015
Citations: 2015 P.S.C. Crl. 705
SC Citations: 2015 SCP 55
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/C.R.P._210_2015.pdf

[1] ORDER Muhammad Haroon ur Rasheed, the petitioner herein seeks bail in case FIR No.39 dated 28. 01.2015 registered under Section 489 -F PPC at P.S. SMA, Tank. We were not inclined to grant bail in view of the circumstances which have come to light in this case. Therefore, learned counsel for the petitioner requests that the record of the case present ly with the Additional Advocate General may be ordered to be sent back to the trial Court so that the trial can be proceeded with.

[2] The learned Law Officer for KP shall retain a copy of the record and transmit the original back to the trial Court which may proceed in the matter and decide the case expeditiously. Crl. P. 210 of 2015 2 2. The learned DAG has submitted a report (Crl.M.A. ). The Secretary LJCP has pointed out that statistical information had been sought from the five governments so that baseline data could b e established.

[3] However, according to him, the requisite information has not been furnished by the governments concerned. Some reports have been filed in Court today. Upon a cursory examination of the same, there appears to be some lack of urgency. For inst ance, the Joint Investigation Directorate (JID) has still not been established or made functional.

[4] The National Coordinator is present and states that the funding required is two billion approximately. On 18.03.2015 a summary was sent to the Prime Minister for approval but the same was returned in April, 2015 with some observations. On 6.5.2015 a revised summary was sent by NACTA to Prime Minister but the same also was returned with comments.

[5] For the third time on 9.7.2015 a second revised summary has been sent which is awaiting decision by the government. The National Coordinator has also stated that the existing budgetary allocation of rupees one hundred million is grossly insufficient even for meeting the salaries and operating costs of NACTA.

[6] According t o him, the organization is under -staffed and cannot perform the function of coordination without the requisite funding. 3. The report submitted by the learned DAG also shows that immediately after the announcement of National Action Plan on 24.12.2014 a sub committee was constituted in terms of Item No.6 of the National Action Plan for the purpose of choking the financing for terrorists and terrorist organizations.

[7] It is in this context that relevant statistical data has not as yet been furnished by any o f the governments to the Secretary LJCP. As a consequence, the on-ground monitoring of NGos/INGOs is not evident. The government s shall, therefore, expedite their efforts to gather the relevant data and furnish the same to the Secretary LJCP who shall coll ate the data and submit a report before the next date of hearing. 4.

[8] The learned Law Officer for government of Balochistan has candidly conceded that there is no information or data currently available with the government in connection with the sources o f funding and the expenditure by NGOs/INGOs, operating within Balochistan. The same is the position with the government of KP.

[9] The learned Law Officer, KP has, however, pointed out that in connection with an NGO namely Baran it has been found that funds wa s received in its account in MCB, Kohat Road, Peshawar. From MCB, Peshawar the funding was traced to Standard Chartered Bank, Peshawar. Thereafter, the money trail went Crl.

[10] P. 210 of 2015 3 dead. This is just one out of ten thousand NGOs operating in KP. The learned Law Office r states that a report has been prepared pursuant to the previous order but the same has not as yet been filed. Let the same be filed before the next date of hearing. 5. The government of Punjab, however, appears to have made some progress in gathering t he relevant data.

[11] A report (Crl.M.A. ) has been filed in Court. Let a copy of the same be supplied by the Additional AG to the Secretary LJCP today. 6. The learned Law Officer of the Sindh government states that the state of affairs and information /data gathering in respect of NGOs/INGOs in the Province of Sindh is not satisfactory.

[12] Currently he has submitted a report. Let a copy of the same be supplied by the Addl. AG to the Secretary LJCP who may go through the same and submit a report before the next date of hearing. 7. Re-list on 28.07.2015. Judge Judge Islamabad, The 22nd July, 2015 M. Azhar Malik/*