Case No: C.R.P.70/2018
Case Title: Khan Muhammad Khan v. Islamic Republic of Pak thr. President of Pak & Others.
Subject: Misc. Appeal Against the order of The Registrar
Judge: MR. JUSTICE MIAN SAQIB NISAR, HCJ
Judgment Date: 04-03-2018
Upload Date: 07-04-2018
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2018 SCP 51
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/C.R.P._70_2018_dt_7_4_2018.pdf

[1] judgment of this Court dated 13.02.2018 ) C.R.P.: Khan Muhammad Khan Vs. Islami c Republic of Pakistan through President of Pakistan & others C.R.P.: Application Nazar Abbas Shah Vs. United Bank Limited through its Manager & Operations Manager C.R.P.: Allied Bank Ltd. Vs. Farrukh Niaz C.R.P.: Applicati on by Muhammad Farooq Vs.

[2] Allied Bank Ltd. C.R.P.: Application by Ghulam Hussain & others Vs. Allied Bank Ltd. C.R.P.: Application by Walayat Hussain alias Raza Butt Vs. Allied Bank Ltd. C.R.P.: Application by Abdul Jabbar and others Vs. Allied Bank Ltd. through its president C.M.A.: Application by Muhammad Anwar and others For the petitioner(s): (in CRP / & CMA ) (CRP ) (CRP ) (CRP ) (CMA ) (CRPs 82 -) (CRP  ) (CRP ) Mr.

[3] Salman Aslam Butt, Sr. ASC Syed Ali Zafar, ASC. Mr. Tariq Aziz, AOR. Mr. Ahmed Awais, ASC. Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR. Mr. Shahid Anwar Bajwa, ASC. Mr. M. S. Khattak, AOR Mr. Babar A. Khilji, ASC. Mr. Tariq Mehmood Khokhar, ASC. Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR In-person Nemo. For the respondent(s) / On Court’s Notice: Mr.

[4] Zah id Hussain, General Manager MCB -: 2 :- Mr. Adnan Afzal, Unit Head UBL Mr. Atif Izhar, Group Head HR , ABL Rana Asif, Manager Industrial Relations ABL Date of hea ring: 3.4.2018 ORDER MIAN SAQIB NISAR, CJ. - 10:30 a.m.: Our judgment dated 13.2.2018 has not been complied with till date. The review petitions though have been filed against the said judgment but no interim relief has been granted therein to suspen d the judgment under review .

[5] Let the Chief Executive Officers of HBL, ABL, UBL and MCB be present in the Court at 6:30 p.m. today , or in lieu thereof, an undertaking be made by the said Banks to the effect that the judgment dated 13.2.2018 shall be complie d with in letter and spirit . 6:30 p.m.: 2. Pursuant to our above order in the morning, Mr.

[6] Salman Aslam Butt, learned Sr. ASC present in Court has placed on the record the written undertaking s on behalf of UBL and MCB , which are scanned as under: -: 3 :- 3. On account of the above, we hold that the judgment un der review shall be implemented in letter and spirit. However, after hearing the learned counsel representing the Banks and going through the contents of the review petitions, we do not find any merit in these review petitions, which are accordingly dismissed but with one clarification , on the request of the learned counsel , that the implementation shall be made with regard to the persons who have been retired/ retrenched by the respective Banks but the sa me shall not be done regarding the persons who left the Banks on the basis of the Golden Handshake Scheme (GHSS ) because t hose who have received the benefits of the GHSS do not fall within the said category, and thus are not entitled to the said benefit of increase in pension .

[7] It is further clarified that pensionary benefits under our judgment dated 13.2.2018 will be paid to the 5416 retrenched employees of UBL whose services were terminated under the retrenchment scheme dated 10.10.1997, if they qualified on the said date in terms of having served the bank for ten years. -: 4 :- 4.

[8] Syed Ali Zafar, learned ASC representing HBL has placed on the record the following undertaking: He s tates that during the course of hearing of the matter as per paragraph 2(v)(c) of the proposal submitted by him, some clarification of the judgment under review is required, suffice it to say that this by itself is no ground for review.

[9] No case for review has been made out. The review petitio n is accordingly dismissed. However, if any person , who is entitled to the pension in terms of the said judgment, if not paid , may -: 5 :- approach th is Court for enforcement of his right and that matter shall be decided independently . 5. Mr.

[10] Shahid Anwar Bajwa, learned ASC representing Allied Bank Limit ed, has also placed on the record the following undertaking: He states that a clarification is required regarding those employees who have received 50% commutation of the ir pension; suffice it to say that this by itself is no ground for review.

[11] No case for review has been made out. The review petition is accordingly dismissed. However, if any person who is not paid pension which he feels entitled under the judgment may -: 6 :- approach this Court for the enforcement of his right on that basis, this aspect of the matter shall be considered independently . 6.

[12] No case for review has been made out in all other review petitions . The review petitions and miscellaneous applications /appeals are accordingly dismissed. CHIEF JUSTICE JUDGE JUDGE ISLAMABAD. 3rd April, 2018. Not approved for reporting Mudassar /