Case No: Crl.O.P.148/2022
Case Title: Federation of Pakistan through Secretary Ministry of Interior v. Imran Ahmed Khan Niazi
Subject: Contempt of Court/Non-compliance of Court Order
Judge: Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial
Judgment Date: 26-10-2022
Upload Date: 26-10-2022
Citations: NA
SC Citations: 2022 SCP 292
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.o.p._148_2022.pdf

[1] Order) (Regarding blocking of Roads/Highways and creating hindrance in movement of citizens and harassment). Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Minis try of Interior …Petitioner(s) Versus Imran Ahm ed Khan Niazi …Respondent(s) For the Petitioner(s) : Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AGP Mr. Anis M. Shahzad, AOR Mr.

[2] Salman Aslam Butt, ASC For the respondent : Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC For Dr. Baba r Awan and Mr. Faisal Fareed : Mr. Abid S. Zuberi, ASC (Both present in person) On Court ’s call : Mr. Ahmed Awais, AG Punjab Mr. Faisal Shahkar, IGP Punjab. Mr. Tipu Suleman, Addl. IG. Rai Shahid Saleem , AIG. Date of Hearing : 07.11.2022 O R D E R Learned counsel for the respondent states that he has managed to have a brief meeting with his client, who has just been discharged from hospital after the assassination attempt on him on 03.11.2022.

[3] He has prepared a draft reply but statedly that does not reflect his best effort. 2. The Inspector Gene ral of Police Punjab informs that the FIR regarding occurrence of the attempted assassination of the respondent has not been registered so far. Crl.O.P. 148 of 2022 2 He has a duty to act in accordance with law whi ch necessitates the lod ging of an FIR in respect of the commission of a cognizable offence.

[4] Let this aspect of the matter be considered in appropriate proceedings tomorrow. 3. The learned counsel for the respondent is granted few more days to file a proper reply . Relist in the next week . Chief Justice Judge Judge With profound respect, I have serious jurisdictional reservations regarding the observation s made in para 2 of the order, as they are not relevant to the lis in hand.