Case No: Crl.A.137-L/2010
Case Title: Muhammad Yousaf v. The State, etc
Subject: Against Acquittal/Sessions
Judge: Mr. Justice Asif Saeed Khan Khosa
Judgment Date: 25-10-2018
Upload Date: 21-02-2019
Citations: PLD 2019 SC 461
SC Citations: 2019 SCP 21
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Crl.A._137_L_2010.pdf

[1] ORDER Asif Sae ed Khan Khosa, J. : An application has been received from the learned Advocate -on-Record for the appellant seeking an adjournment on account of serious indisposition of the learned counsel for the appellant and the request so received is not opposed by the learned counsel for the respondents. 2.

[2] We note that at the time of murder of Muhammad Aslam on 02.02.2005 he was survived by his father namely Waryam, his wife namely Mst. Razia Bibi and his son namely Muhammad Akmal who could inherit from the deceased a nd were, thus, his Wali in Criminal Appeal No. 137-L of 2010 2 terms of section 305(a), PPC.

[3] Respondents No. 2 and 3 were convicted and sentenced by the trial court for the murder of Muhammad Aslam and during the pendency of their appeal the y were acquitted of the charge by the High Court on the basis of a compr omise arrived at between the said respondents and the surviving and existing Wali of the deceased as by that time the father of the deceased who was originally a Wali of the deceas ed had already died and, thus, those inheri ting from th e father of the deceased were not joined in the compromise.

[4] The issue brought before this Court is as to whether for the purpose of a valid compromis e in the present case of murder the heirs of the deceased at the time when the deceased was done to death w ere the persons who could enter into a compromise with the private respondents or when one of such heirs of the deceased h ad died after Muhammad Aslam deceased’s murder could the heirs of such heir of Muhammad Aslam deceased be treated as a nece ssary part of a compromise to be affected for the benefit of the present private respondents .

[5] This issue had initially been dealt with by a Division Bench of the Lahore High Court, Lahore in the case of Ahmad Nawaz alias Gogi v. The State (PLD 2007 Lahore 121) and with express reference to the provisions of section 305(a), PPC it had been held that for the purpose of a compromise a Wali is only that person who could inherit from the deceased and not a n heir of an heir of the deceased who could not inherit from the de ceased at the time of his murder.

[6] The said view of the Lahore High Court, Lahore had been taken notice of a 5-member Larger Bench of this Court in the case of Abdul Rashid alias Teddi v. The State and others (2013 SCMR 1281) but such view did not find favo ur with this Court in that case and we note that while taking a different view of the matter this Court had not referred to the definition of Wali contained in section 305(a), PPC at all which definition apparently did not support the view taken by this Co urt in that case.

[7] I n this view of the matter we consider that the issu e involved in this case requires a fresh look by this Court so as to render an authoritative pronouncement on the subject. Let the office bring the matter to the notice of the Hon’ble Ch ief Justice who is Criminal Appeal No. 137-L of 2010 3 requested to consider advisability or otherwise of constitution of a Larger Bench of at least seven Hon’ble Judges of this Court in order to resolve the controversy noted above.