Case No: Crl.P.L.A.50-Q/2017
Case Title: Muhammad Ashraf v. The State
Subject: Life Imprisonment/Sessions
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed
Judgment Date: 13-10-2020
Upload Date: 19-03-2021
Citations: 2021 SCMR 758
SC Citations: 2021 SCP 88
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.p._50_q_2017.pdf

[1] judgment dated 19.06.2017 passed by the Balochistan High Court, Quetta in Crl. Appeal No. ) Muhammad Ashraf …Petitioner(s) Versus The State …Res pondent (s) For the Petitioner(s): Mr. Zahoor Ahmed Chishti, ASC For the State : Mr. Wallayat Hussain, Addl. Prosecutor General Bal ochistan Date of hearing: 13.10.2020.

[2] ORDER Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Mehboob Ali, 35, was shot dead during the wee hours of 21.6.2015, while asleep as a guest in the house of his brother Abdul Karim (PW -5), located within the precincts of P olice Station Levies Dashat , Mastung. Incident was reported by his sister Zarnaz (PW-1), a resident in the neighbourhood ; she accused the petitioner alongside Dur Khan , Qadir Bukhsh, Badal Khan, Haji Khan and Muhammad Yousaf , away from the law till date , for the murder in the backdrop of a previous dispute .

[3] Spot inspection includes seizure of blood as well as 18 casings of Kalashnikov . Autopsy report confirmed multiple entrance wound s on the forehead with corresponding exits, cumulatively leading to the dea th. The petitioner was alone to contest indictment before the learned Sessions Judge Mastung ; vide Criminal Petition No. 50-Q of 2017 2 judgment dated 08.10.2016 he was convicted under section s 302, 449 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced to imprisonment for life and seven years RI , respectively , with a direction to pay compensation as well as fine , upheld by the High Court of Balochistan vide impugned judgment dated 19.0 6.2017, albeit with a direction for concurrent commutation of sentences, pre - trial period inclusive . 2.

[4] Learne d counsel for the petitioner contends that the deceased was done to death under mysterious circumstances in an unseen occurrence, noticed subsequently and reported through the witnesses , stage -managed after consultations; that despite his having endured th e period of physical remand, no recovery was effected from the petitioner, a circumstance in itself, vindicating his position.

[5] Occurrence being a night affair, reported after inordinate delay, the question of assailants’ identity is looming large on the scene, concluded the learned counsel . The learned Law Officer has faithfully defended the impugned judgment. 3. Heard. Record perused. 4. The prosecution has primarily relied upon ocular account furnished by Mst.

[6] Naz Malik (PW -3), Abdul Fatah (PW -4) and A bdul Karim (PW -5); the last is real brother of the deceased whom he visited during the fateful night in the month of Ramzan ; Mst. Naz Malik is a niece, wife of Abdul Fatah (PW -4), residents of the locality ; all of them unanimously pointed their finger s upon the petitioner, accompanie d by the absconding co -accused who took on the deceased shortly after close of Sehar .

[7] In this backdrop, the hypothesis of a mistaken identity in the month of June with early dawn is beside the mark. Given the location of police station at a distance of  kilometers from the place of occurrence in the province of Balochistan with primitive means of communication, report straight at the police station cannot be viewed with suspicion.

[8] With assistance of learned counsel, we have gone through the statements of witnesses to find them in a confidence inspiring unison; inconsequential cross -examination mostly comprising of bald suggestions, each vehemently denied, fails to reflect upon the credibility of witnesses ; on the contrary, confirms an ongoing dispute between the deceased and Dur Khan , one of the accused still Criminal Petition No. 50-Q of 2017 3 absconding .

[9] The witnesses being inmate of the premises, themselves have no axe to grind against the accused nor are expected to swap the actual offender with the innocent , as there is nothing on the record to even obliquely entertain any theory of substitution ; they have rightly been held as worthy of credence ; reliance upon their testimonies by the Courts below being in accord with the principles of safe administration of criminal justice calls for no interference.

[10] Petition fails. Leave declined. Judge Judge Judge Islamabad, the 13th October , 2020 Not approved for reporting Azmat /-