Case No: Crl.A.107-L/2017
Case Title: Sadi Ahmad, etc v. The State
Subject: Life Imprisonment/Sessions
Judge: MR. JUSTICE QAZI MUHAMMAD AMIN AHMED
Judgment Date: N/A
Upload Date: 29-05-2019
Citations: 2019 SCMR 1220
SC Citations: 2019 SCP 128
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Crl.A._107_L_2017.pdf

[1] judgment dated 28.4.2014 passed by the Lahore High Court, Lahore in Crimina l Appeal No.1668 of 2010 and M.R. No.333 of 20 10). Sadi Ahmad and another …Appellant(s) VERSUS The State …Respondent(s) For the Appellant(s) : Rana Liaqat Ali Khan , ASC along with Ms. Nig hat Saee d Mughal, ASC Complainant(s) : In person ( Taj Muhammad ) For the State : Ch.

[2] Mustafa , Deputy Prosecutor General , Punjab Date of Hearing : 23.05.2019 JUDGMENT Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J.- Sadi Ahmad and Mukhtar Ahmad alias Bari, appellant s herein, were indicted by a learned Additional Sessions Judge at Okara for committing murder of Javed Iqbal in the course of robbery on 2.4.2007 within the remit of Police Station Sa tgarha .

[3] It is alleged that Sadi Ahmad , appellant and Ijaz alias Jajji and two unknown assailants hired deceased’s cab within witn esses ’ view , subsequently vanished . A corpse was spotted subsequently identified as that of Javed Iqbal and in this backdrop , the appellants and co -accused were suspected for the crime .

[4] Vehicle was t aken into possession on 3.4.2007 ; it was traced in consequence of an accident in the province of Khyber Pakhtoonkhwa ; it is prosecution case that the passengers impersonated themselves to hush up their identity ; Sadi Ahm ad, appellant was formally arrested on 13.4.2007 ; upon Criminal Appeal No. 107-L of 2017 . 2 disclosure , he led to the recovery of various incrim inatory items , followed by Mukhtar Ahmad on 27.2.2008 .

[5] Indicted on 29.5.2008, they claimed trial . 2. Prosecution case in nutshell is that the appellants hired the cab, done away with the deceased and while they were on their way to dispose of the vehicle , in the province of Khyber Pakhtoonkhw a they met an accident where in Shamim Bibi died and Sadi Ahmad, appellant become unconscious , while Mukhtar Ahmad fled from the scene ; in this bac kdrop, it relied upon evidence of last seen and a confessional statement by Sadi Ahmad , beside certain recoveries , to drive home the charge .

[6] According to the crime report , Taj Muhammad, PW along with Tariq Mahmood and Tanvir Amjad , saw the deceased depart ing with Sadi Ahmad and Ijaz alias Jajji, P.O. with two unknown persons . In the totality of circumstances , statement s of the complainant , Tariq Ma hmood and Saeed Anwar , notwithstanding, there is little eviden ce to safely frame Mukhtar Ahmad alias Bari with the crime as he was never exposed to the witnesses in the identification test .

[7] It is prosecution case that Sadi Ahmad impersonated himself when he met an accident in Khyber Pakhtoonkhwa and his real identity was established subsequent thereto. None has b een produced to establish identity of Sadi Ahmad in injured condition, when apprehended after the accident. There is nothing on the record to infer that some woman by the name of Shamim Bibi died in the accident so what is left in the field is deficient last scene evidence and confessional statement of Mukhtar Ahmad alias Bari, recorded by the learned trial Judge in the midst.

[8] We are not much impressed by the evidence of last seen for being outside the bounds of proximity in terms of time and space , beside s otherwise being far from confidence inspiring . According to the autopsy report, asphyxia is the cause of death, therefore recoveries of weapons do not advance prosecution case.

[9] Pointing out of place of occurrence by the accused and memo thereof being ina dmissible is entirely beside the mark . It does not constitute information within the contemplation of Article 40 of the Qaoon -e-Shahadat Order, 1984. Adverting to confessional Criminal Appeal No. 107-L of 2017 . 3 statement of Mukhtar Ahmad alias Bari recorded on 14.1.2019 , we do not feel pers uaded to rely upon the disclosure ; it is not in line with prosecution case set up in the crime report; so diametrically different that one cannot be accepted without exclusion of other and vice versa ; it is exculpatory in nature as Mukhtar Ahmad is reticen t about his individual role and liability in the crime .

[10] According to him, the deceased was blind folded , thrown in a sugarcane field with his hands tied with a rope, whereas as per autopsy report cause of death is asphyxia . Motive behind sudden move by the appellant , Mukhtar Ahmad alias Bari during the trial is far from clear ; disclosure is certainly not a truthful account of event leading to deceased’s death.

[11] When confronted during his examination under Section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1898 , he denied to have confessed his guilt ; he repudiated pangs of conscience , mistakenly observed by the learned trial Judge . Prosecution has not been able to drive home the charge beyond reasonable doubt , therefore , in the absence of reliable evidence appell ants’ conviction on moral satisfaction alone cannot sustain ; they are extended the benefit of the doubt.

[12] Criminal Appeal 107 - L/2017 is allowed , impugned judgment is set aside; they shall be released forthwith, if not required in any other case. JUDGE JUDGE Lahore , the 23rd of May, 2019 Ghulam Raza /* JUDGE