Case No: Crl.P.L.A.60/2017
Case Title: Inhaf Ullah v. The State and another
Subject: Life Imprisonment
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed
Judgment Date: 07-04-2021
Upload Date: 11-08-2021
Citations: 2021 SCMR 1725
SC Citations: 2021 SCP 236
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.p._60_2017.pdf

[1] judgment dated 20.12.2016 passed by the Peshawar High Court Peshawar in Cr. A. No. 562- P/2015 ) Inhaf Ullah …Petitioner (s) Versus The State & another …Res pondent (s) For the Petitioner (s): Mr. Astaghfarullah, ASC For the State: Ms. Ayesha Tasneem, ASC Date of hearing: 07.04.2021 . JUDGMENT Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Atique,  , was playing outside his house , located within the precincts of Police Station Bhana Marri, Peshawar on 16.10.2014 ; at 4:00 p.m, he took a bottle of water from his house to serve a passerby whereafter he vanished from the scene ; according to the prosecution, he was whisked away in an alto car ; the incident was reported same day by his brother Muhammad Aamir (PW-3); he also informed his father who was in China on a business trip and rushed back to join search f or the child ; after  days of the occurrence, an unknown person delivered fruit in two shopping bags to the complainant , purportedly sent by his father’s friend Tariq ; the fruit carried a chit bearing a cell phone number and a message about the captivit y of the child with the dispatcher.

[2] The complainant handed over the chit to his father Umar Khan (PW -2). The family contacted the captors on phone who demanded Rs.2 crore as ransom, finally settled as Rs.800 ,000/ -, paid at the designated place in lieu of a bductee’s release on 22.10.2014 . As the investigation progressed, Inhafullah, Shahid, Musharaf Khan, Alif Khan, Shahzad Gul, Atlas alias Aslat and Asad Ullah were taken on board as accused; Inhaafullah petitioner , in response to a court question, was ident ified by Umar Khan (PW -2) as recipient of the Criminal Petition No.60 of 2017 2 ransom .

[3] The learned trial Judge vide judgment dated 21.09.2015 proceeded to convict all the accused under section 365 -A of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced them to imprisonment for life; on appeal, the Peshawar High Court, barring the petitioner , acquitted all the accused from the charge vide impugned judgment dated 20.12.2010 , vires whereof, are being assailed on a variety of grounds.

[4] It is argued that neither the complainant nor his father named or identified the petitioner in their examination -in-chief and it was in pursuance to a question prompted by the Court that Umar Khan (PW -2) reluctantly pointed his finger upon the petitioner, for the first time in the Court; according to the learned counsel, there was no occasion for the learned Judge to put Court question to a witness undergoing examination -in-chief to the detriment of the petitioner ; that a different vehicle other than the one used in the occurrence was recovered , that too, upon the disclos ure of a co-accused , since acquitted , and, thus, mere recovery of ransom amount statedly upon petitioner’s disclosure without any identification mark is hardly sufficient to sustain the charge .

[5] Acquittal of six out of seven co-accused brought the entire ed ifice to the ground, concluded the learned counsel . The learned Law Officer has faithfully defended the impugned judgment. 2. Heard. Record perused. 3. Abduction of a small child for ransom is a most serious offence and it is hard to expect that a fami ly would come up with a fake script , nonetheless, in the present case, we have noted glaring flaws and discrepancies that cannot be possibly ignored on a perceptional paradigm.

[6] According to the complainant, the incident had occurred on 16.10.2014 and repor ted same day in the absence of his father , present in China looking after some trade assignment, however, according to the latter, upon receipt of information, he rushed back and when the incident was reported on 19.10.2014 .

[7] The discrepancy may be viewed a s human error inasmuch as according to the record, the First Information Report was recorded on 16.10.2014 , nonetheless , arrival of a massage demanding ransom through an unknown person categorically claiming to have been dispatched by one Tariq without any reaction or response , in those testing hours, fails to inspire confidence .

[8] Similarly, without intervention of police, payment of ransom to the petitioner and immediate release of the child are circumstances no less intriguing either . No test identificatio n parade was carried out to qualify the standard of proof within the contemplation of Article 22 of the Qanun -e-Shahadat Order, 1984 .

[9] Similarly, petitioner’s identification , with handcuffs in the dock, through intervention of the Criminal Petition No.60 of 2017 3 Presiding Judge fails to c ommend our approval. The Court bears no responsibility either for the prosecution or the defence; it must maintain its neutrality to decide a case on the strength of evidence alone , essentially to be adduced by the prosecution itself to drive home the charge.

[10] No doubt, the trial Court is vested with ample authority to put questions to the witness , however, the power of this amplitude must be exercised with caution and circumspection , solely in aid of justice without disturbing equality in the scales ; in the present case, incessant interventions by the trial Judge has grievously undermined testimony of a witness , otherwise mute and reticent on a fundamental detail of the case .

[11] Acquittal of six out of seven accused , though assigned different roles, nonetheless , equally blamed to have aided the crime, leaves nothing in the field. It would be unsafe to maintain the conviction Criminal petition is converted into appeal and allowed; impugned judgment is set aside; the appellant is acquitted of the charge and shall be released forthwith, if not required to be detained by law.