Case No: Crl.A.185/2006
Case Title: Waqar Ali Shamsi v. The State
Subject: Life Imprisonment/Sessions
Judge: MR. JUSTICE QAZI MUHAMMAD AMIN AHMED
Judgment Date: 14-10-2019
Upload Date: 16-10-2019
Citations: 2019 SCMR 2039
SC Citations: 2019 SCP 224
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.a._185_2006.pdf

[1] judgment dated 13.6.2005 of the High Court of Sindh, Karahi passed in ATA No.) Waqar A. Shamsi (Criminal Appeal No.) Muhammad Arshad (Jail Petition No.) … Petitioner(s) Versus The State (in both cases) … Respondent(s) For the Petitioner(s) :Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR (in Criminal Appeal No.) Nemo. (in Jail Petition No.) For the State :Ch.

[2] Aamir Rehman, Additional Attorney General Mr. Khadim Hussain, Additional Prosecutor General, Sindh Date of Hearing :14.10.2019. JUDGMENT QAZI MUHAMMAD AMIN AHMED , J.- Hafiz Muhammad Umar , 18, resident of Phase -VI, D.H.A. Karachi, a student of Saint Andrew School , left home in the morning of fateful day i.e. 16 -9-2003 to attend the school ; he did not return at the expected point of time whereupon his brother Muhammad Faisal (PW -1) inquired from his friend Waqar Ali Shamsi, appellant herein , on a cell phone , albeit with no information; in the meanwhile, the complainant received a phone call; the anony mous caller claimed custody of Hafiz Muhammad Umar while demanding ransom for his release .

[3] CPLC, (Citizen Public Liaison Committee) was taken on board whereafter the incident was formally reported at 8:00 p.m. A supplementary statement , on the following da y, divulged further details of communication between the captor and the abductee on the Criminal Appeal No. and Jail Petition No. 2 basis whereof , the appellants were arrayed as suspect s alongside Imran Masih alias Raja, since absconder.

[4] Waqar Ali Shamsi a ppellant was taken into custody; pursuant to a disclosure, he led the police party alongside witnesses to a premises, occupied by the absconder under rent, wherefrom the dead body of Hafiz Muhammad Umar was found , bundled in a sack ; as the investigation progressed, Muhammad Arshad petitioner was arr ested on 20 -9-2003 ; the accused were finally sent to trial as juveniles ; the trial culminated into their conviction vide judgment dated 15.1.2004 ; they were sentenced for homicide, abduction for ransom and terrorism, findings upheld by the learned High Cou rt with extension of benefit of section 382 -B of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 , vide impugned judgment dated 13 -6-2005 , being assailed by the convict s; leave has been granted in Criminal Appeal No.185 of 2016 filed by Waqar Ali Shamsi , clubbed with J ail Petition No.694 of 2018 filed by Muhammad Arshad; with a common thread, these are being decided through this single judgment. 2.

[5] For convicts, it is argued that prosecution failed to adduce sufficient evidence to positively link them with the crime and that entire case is structured upon a misplaced and misconceived suspicion, aspects that escaped notice by the courts below . The learned Additional Attorney General assisted by Additional Prosecutor General Sindh faithfully defended the impugned judgme nts; by referring to various pieces of evidence, they maintained that there existed sufficient evidence, usually procurable in the cases of like nature , to frame the accused with the charge by excluding every hypothesis of their innocence . 3.

[6] Heard. Reco rd perused. 4. Calamity strike s by surprise; people seldom fall prey to crimes under ideal circumstances, therefore, it would be unrealistic to insist for or expect choice uniform pieces of evidence in every criminal case; what is to be essentially seen i s that whether prosecution was able to come forward with the available evidence, possible under the circumstances of the case and that whether such a volume or nature of evidence is sufficient to sustain the charge .

[7] In the present case , the complainant, deceased’s brother , unsuspectingly sought information from Waqar Ali Shamsi appellant , being a fast friend, expected to know the whereabouts ; as the investigation geared up , he made his breast clean , reaching out to the deceased and, thus prosecution was abl e to constitute a chain of circumstances, link by link, through last seen evidence, occupation of premises, recovery of electric wire and ropes, Criminal Appeal No. and Jail Petition No. 3 employed by the culprits to cause death confirmed as asphyxial and, thus argument that there was no evidence for a guilty return does not hold much water .

[8] Devastated family residing in a n affluent neighbourhood had no axe to grind against the appellant , deceased’s best friend, to swap him with the real offender ; his exclusive knowledge is a piece of evidence inexor ably pointed upon his culpability; web of circumstances is equally hovering over the guilt of Muhammad Arshad petitioner as well ; they cannot escape the consequences of deceased’s murder on the strength of bald denial s, supported by inconsequential defence furnished by their well -wishers; their convictions as well as sentences consequent thereupon for an offence under Section 302 (b) of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 are maintained , however, we have not been able to find out any piece of evidence to frame th em with the charge of abduction for ransom , even obliquely , as there is no proof that communication by the anonymous caller demanding ransom was actually made by the convicts ; phone data sans positive proof about the caller or subscriber of cell phone hand set as the calls were made, according to prosecution’s own case , from a public calling booth ; ransom was never transacted, therefore, prosecution case to the extent of abduction for ransom is on a stumbling ground ; they are acquitted from the charge under section 365 -A of the Code ibid.

[9] Concomitantly, their conviction under section 7 (e) is set aside and they are acquitted from the charge as well ; sentence shall be commuted with the benefit provided under Section 382 -B of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 . With the above modification, Criminal Appeal is allowed and the Jail petition is converted into appeal with the same consequence .