Case No: Crl.A.337/2015
Case Title: Khuda-e-Noor v. The State
Subject: Transfer of cases/From one Court to another Court within District
Judge: Mr. Justice Asif Saeed Khan Khosa
Judgment Date: 11-11-2015
Upload Date: 06-01-2016
Citations: PLD 2016 SC 195
SC Citations: 2016 SCP 3
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Crl.A._337_2015.pdf

[1] judgment dated 25.05.2015 passed by the High Court of Balochistan, Quetta in Criminal Revision No. 32 of 2015) Khuda -e-Noor …Appellant versus The State …Respondent For the appellant: Mr. Kamran Murtaza, ASC For the State: Mr. Tahir Iqbal Khattak, Additional Prosecutor -General, Balochistan On Court’s call: Mr.

[2] Sohail Mehmood, Deputy Attorney -General for Pakistan Date of hearing: 11.11.2015 JUDGMENT Asif Saeed Khan Khosa, J .: The appellant is an accused person in case FIR No. 19 registered at Le vies Station Dasht, District Mastung on 16.06.2014 in respect of an offence under section 302, PPC read with section 34, PPC.

[3] According to the allegation leveled in the FIR the appellant and his co -accused had murdered one Mst. Samreen , a sister of the app ellant, because she was living with her mother after her mother had obtained a divorce from the deceased’s father which factor had annoyed the accused party. After completion of the investigation a Challan in respect of this case was submitted before the l earned Sessions Judge, Criminal Appeal No. 337 of 2015 2 Mastung and during the trial the prosecution improved its case vis- à-vis the motive and it was alleged that Mst.

[4] Samreen deceased was not enjoying good moral character as she had developed illicit relations with one Att a Ullah and due to that reason she had been done to death by the appellant and his co -accused . On the basis of such factor having become available on the record the learned Sessions Judge, Mastung formed an opinion that the case in hand was one of honour killing and suc h killing amounted to “terrorism ” within the purview of section 6(2)(g) of the Anti -Terrorism Act, 1997 and, thus, the case against the appellant and his co -accused was transferre d to an Anti -Terrorism Court.

[5] While forming such view the learned Sessions Ju dge, Mastung had been influenced by the law declared by the High Court of Balochistan, Quetta in the case of Gul Muhammad v. The State (PLD 2012 Balochistan 22) . The said order passed by the learned Sessions Judge , Mastung was assailed by the appellant through a revision petition filed before the High Court of Balochistan, Quetta which revision petition was dismissed by the High Court through the impugned order dated 25.05.2015.

[6] Hence, the present appeal by leave of this Court granted on 12.08.2015. 2. We have heard the learned counsel for the appellant , the learned Deputy Attorney -General for Pakistan and the learned Additional Prosecutor -General, Balochistan appearing for the State and have gone through the record of the case with their assistance. 3.

[7] The crucial question involved in this appeal is as to whether the learned Sessions Judge, Mastung was justified in holding that the case in hand was one of honour killing and, thus, it was a case of “terrorism” attracting the exclusive jurisdiction of an A nti- Terrorism Court or not. It also needs to be examined as to whether the High Court of Balochistan, Quetta was justified in declaring in the case of Gul Muhammad (supra) that by virtue of the provisions of section 6(2)(g) of the Anti -Terrorism Act, 1997 all cases of honour killing are to be tried by an Anti -Terrorism Court.

[8] We have minutely gone through the said judgment passed by the High Criminal Appeal No. 337 of 2015 3 Court of Balochistan, Quetta and have found that for holding that all cases of honour killing attracted the definitio n of “terrorism” the High Court had only relied upon the provisions of section 6(2)(g) of the Anti -Terrorism Act, 1997 without appreciating that by virtue of the provisions of section 6 of the Anti -Terrorism Act, 1997 any action falling within any of the categories of cases mentioned in subsection (2) of section 6 of the Anti -Terrorism Act, 1997 could not be accepted or termed as “terrorism” unless the said action was accompanied by a “design ” or “purpose ” specified in section 6(1)(b) or (c) of the said A ct.

[9] If the interpretation of section 6(2)(g) of the Anti -Terrorism Act, 1997 advanced by the High C ourt of Balochistan, Quetta in the said judgment were to be accepted as correct then all cases of a person taking the law in his own hands are to be declared or accepted as case s of terroris m but that surely was not the intention of the legislature.

[10] The provisions of section 6 of the Anti -Terrorism Act, 1997 which define “terrorism” clearly show that the said section is divided into two main parts, i.e. the first part contained in section 6(1)(b) and (c) of the said Act dealing with the mens rea mentioning the “design ” or the “purpose” behind an action and the second part falling in section 6(2) of the said Act specifying the actions which, if coupled with the mens rea mentioned above, would constitute the offence of “terrorism ”.

[11] This scheme of section 6 of the Anti -Terrorism Act, 1997 had unfortunately not been considered by the High Court of Balochistan, Quetta while rendering the judgment mentioned above and, thus, we have every reason to declare that the said judgment passed by the High Court of Balochistan, Quetta had not laid down the law correctly and had in fact misconceived the legal position contemplated by section 6 of the Anti -Terrorism Act, 1997. 4.

[12] The ca se in hand was a case of a private motive set up in the FIR and during the trial the motive set up in the FIR was changed by the prosecution and an element of honour killing was introduced but even that did not change the character of the offence w hich was nothing but a private offence committed in the privacy of a home with no design or purpose contemplated by Criminal Appeal No. 337 of 2015 4 section 6(1)(b) or (c) of the Anti -Terrorism Act, 1997.

[13] We have, thus, entertained no manner of doubt that the allegations leveled against the appellant and his co -accused in the present criminal case did not attract the jurisdiction of an Anti -Terrorism Court , the learned Sessions Judge, Mastung was not justified in transferring the case to an Anti -Terrorism Court and the High Court was also not legally correct in dismissing the appellant’s revision petition.

[14] This appeal is, therefore , allowed, the impugned orders passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Mastung as well as the High Court of Balochistan, Quetta are set aside and it is declared th at the appellant’s case is to be tried by a court of ordinary jurisdiction. Judge Judge Judge Islamabad 11.11.2015 Approved for reporting .