Case No: Crl.A.103/2019
Case Title: Nadeem Hussain v. The State
Subject: Life Imprisonment/Anti-Terrorism Act
Judge: Mr. Justice Asif Saeed Khan Khosa
Judgment Date: 11-07-2019
Upload Date: 07-08-2019
Citations: 2019 SCMR 1290
SC Citations: 2019 SCP 183
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Crl.A._103_2019.pdf

[1] judgment dated 10.03.2015 passed by the Lahore High Court, Lahore in Criminal Appeal No. 302 of 2009) Nadeem Hussain …Appellant versus The State …Res pondent For the appellant: Ms. Aisha Tasneem, ASC For the State : Mr. Muhammad Jaffar, Deputy Prosecutor -General , Punjab Date of he aring: 11.07.2019 JUDGMENT Asif Saeed Khan Khosa, CJ. : Nadeem Hussain appellant and some others were allegedly involved in two suicide bomb ings at the gate of and inside the premises of the Pakistan Naval War College, Mall Road, Lahore on 04.03.2008 at 1 2.50 P.M. in which incident three persons had died and 18 others, including some officers and officials, were injured.

[2] In respect of the said incident FIR No. 149 was registered at Police Station Race Course, Lahore on the same day and after a regular tria l the appellant was convicted by the trial court on three counts of an offence under section 302(b), PPC read with section 109, PPC and was sentenced to imprisonment for life and to pay compensation on each of such counts besides having been convicted and sentenced for offences under section 7(a) read with section 21 -I of the Anti -Terrorism Act, 1997, section 3 of the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 read with section 109, PPC, section 324, PPC read with section 109, PPC , Criminal Appeal No. 103 of 2019 2 section 427, PPC read with section 10 9, PPC and section 353, PPC read with section 109, PPC.

[3] The appellant challenged his convictions and sentences before the High Court through an appeal which was dismissed and all his convictions and sentences recorded by the trial court were upheld and mai ntained. Hence, the present appeal by l eave of this Court granted on 08.02.2019. 2. Leave to appeal had been granted in this case in order to reappraise the evidence and with the assistance of the learned counsel for the parties we have undertaken that e xercise. 3.

[4] It is admitted at all hands that the appellant had not been nominated in the FIR in any capacity whatsoever and it was at some subsequent stage that he was implicated in this case as an accomplice of his co -accused. During the trial the prose cution had produced some pieces of circu mstantial evidence only as there was no direct evidence available against the appellant.

[5] The first piece of evidence produced by the prosecution vis-à-vis the present appellant was the statement made by Muhammad Iqba l Younis (PW43) who had claimed that the appellant and some others were introduced to him by Abdul Hameed alias Watto co-accused during an assemblage at Raiwand but admittedly no specific utterance on that occasion was attributed to the appellant by the sa id witness.

[6] The second piece of evidence produced against the appellant was again through the statement made by the above mentioned Muhammad Iqbal Younis (PW43) who had claimed that on the date of the present occurrence the said witness had visited a compu ter shop of th e appellant whereat he had seen Abdul Hameed alias Watto and Imran Mota co-accused and two unknown persons who had given some jackets to the said two unknown persons and the n Abdul Hameed alias Watto and Imran Mota co -accused had taken those two unknown person s with them for the purpose of causing blasts at the Pakistan Naval War College, Lahore.

[7] We have gone through the statement made by Muhammad Iqbal Younis (PW43) before the trial court and have found that he had never stated that at the ti me of his seeing the co -accused at the computer shop the Criminal Appeal No. 103 of 2019 3 appellant was also present on that occasion or that he was involved in providing jackets to the unknown culprits and taking them to the scene of the crime.

[8] We have also observed that it had nowhere b een established by the prosecution that the shop in issue actually belonged to the appellant or was in his possession in any other capacity. The third piece of evidence produced by the prosecution against the appellant was that he was arrested from a shop and from that shop some explosive substance, etc. had been recovered.

[9] In that respect we have found that no Memorandum of Recovery vis-à-vis recovery of the explosive substance, etc. had been brought on the record of the case and it had never been proved b y the prosecution that the appellant had any connection with the said shop. The next piece of evidence produced by the prosecution against the appellant was that the Registration Book relevant to one of the motorcycle s used in the main incident was recover ed from the appellant’s possession but after going through the record of this case from cover to cover we have found that no Memorandum of Recovery regarding Registration Book having been recovered from the appellant was brought on the record of the case throughout the trial.

[10] The last piece of evidence relied upon by the prosecution against the app ellant was the statement of Baba r Bakht, S.P. (PW37) who had claimed that on 25.04.2008 the appellant , while in custody , had made a conf ession which was recorded under section 21 -H of the Anti -Terrorism Act, 1997. We have straightway noticed that the said confessional statement attributed to the ap pellant was not signed or thumb -marked by the appellant .

[11] A confession before the police is inadmissible in evidence in normal cases but in case s of terrorism section 21 -H of the Anti -Terrorism Act, 1997 has mad e such a confession before the p olice conditionally admissible. The con dition placed by the said section upon admissibility of such a confession before the police is that there must be some other evidence , including circumstantial evidence , which must reasonably connect the accused person with the alleged offence before a confession made by the accused person before the police i s accepted by a court worth y of any cons ideration.

[12] Such conditional admissibility of a Criminal Appeal No. 103 of 2019 4 confession before the police is con tingent upon availability of some other evidence connecting the accused person with the alleged offence but in the present case , as we have already discussed above , all the o ther pieces of evidence relied upon by the prosecution against the appellant had utterly failed to connect the appellant with the alleged offences.

[13] In this view of the matter the case in hand was not a fit case wherein the trial court could even consider t he confession before the police attributed to the appellant. As if this were not enough, the record of the case shows that Muhammad Hanif , Inspector (PW41) , one of the investigating officer s, had stated before the trial court in black and white that during the investigation no connection between the appellant and his co -accused had been established and this statement of the said investigating officer had been fortified by the statement made by another investigating officer namely Muhammad Yaqoob Awan, Inspe ctor (PW39) who had conceded before the trial court that during the investigation nothing had been recovered from the appellant’s possession. 4.

[14] For what has been discussed above a conclusion is inescapable and unavoidable that the prosecution had failed to prove its case against the appellant beyond reasonable doubt. This appeal is, therefore, allowed, the convictions and sentences of the appellant recorded and upheld by the courts below are set aside and he is acquitted of the charge by extending the be nefit of doubt to him.

[15] He shall be released from the jail forthwith if not required to be detained in connection with any other case. Chief Justice Judge Judge Islamabad 11.07.2019 Approved for reporting . Arif