Case No: Crl.A.324/2011
Case Title: Mst. Rukhsana Begum v. Sajjad & others
Subject: For Enhancement/L.I. to Death
Judge: MR. JUSTICE DOST MUHAMMAD KHAN
Judgment Date: 25-01-2017
Upload Date: 08-03-2017
Citations: 2017 SCMR 596
SC Citations: 2017 SCP 42
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Crl.A._324_2011.pdf

[1] judgment dated 17.6.2 010 of the Lahore High Court, Lahore passed in Crl.A.No., Crl.Rev.No. and M.R.No.). Mst. Rukhsana Begum ….Appellant (In Cr l.A.) VERSUS 1. Sajjad son of Inayat 2. Mehdi son of Inayat 3. Abdul Salam son of Walayat 4. Zaraat son of Inayat 5. Abid son of Bahadar 6. Bilal son of Mehdi Khan 7.

[2] Khushi Muhammad son of Zarrat 8. Afzaal Mehdi son of Mehdi Khan 9. Masood alias Rana son of Adalat Khan 10. The State (In Cr l.A.) ….Respondent s ------------ ------------ 1. Sajjad son of Inayat 2. Mehdi son of Inayat 3. Afzaal Mehdi son of Mehdi Khan 4. Masood alias Rana son of Adalat Khan …Appellants (In Crl.A.) VERSUS The State (In Crl.A.32 ) ….Respondent ___________________ In Crl.A.

[3] For the appell ant: Mr. Ansar Nawaz Mirza, ASC Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR Respondents -2,5,6,8,9: Mr. Allah Bakhsh Gondal, ASC Respondent -10/State: Ch. Zubair Ahmed Farooq, Addl.PG, Pb Crl.As.324 - 2 In Crl.A.32  For the appellant s: Mr. Allah Bakhsh Gondal, ASC Mian Ghulam Hussain AOR (Absent) For State : Ch.

[4] Zubair Ahmed Farooq, Addl.PG, Pb Date of hearing: 25.1.2017 JUDGMENT DOST MUHAMMAD KHAN, J udge :- Both these appeals have been filed with leave of the court dated 3.8.2011 f or reappraisal of the evidence. 2. We have heard learned ASCs for the parties and the State and have carefully made the reappraisal of evidence. 3.

[5] Muhammad Fa azil, while reporting the crime to Inspector /SHO Police Station, Sarai Alamgir on 22.2.2003 , apparently at 1.35 A.N. shown , at some place out of police station, has alleged that on the fateful day at about 11.00 am , he alongwith his sons Muhammad Fayyaz and Muhammad Yar (deceased) , Muhammad Sharif and Fayyaz son of R ahimdad after taking round of their wheat crop near ‘Khohar ’ sat in the open plot and were smoking ‘ HUKKA ’, when in the meanwhile , Inayat son of Qutab Din armed with hatchet, Zaraat, Mehdi, Sajjad sons of Anayat armed with rifles, Abdul Salam son of Walayat armed with rifle, Abid son of Muhammad Sajjad armed with hatch et, Bilal son of Mehdi armed with hatche t, Afzaal Mehdi alias Bodi son of Mehdi Khan armed with hatche t, Khushi Muhammad son of Zaraat armed with hatche t and Muhammad Masood alias Rana son of Adalat Khan (gunman of accused Sajjad ) armed with hatche t, in a concerted manner attacked them after encircling all of them.

[6] Zara at Crl.As.324 - 3 fired at Muhammad Fayyaz hitting him on his left thigh , followed by Mehd i whose fire shot hit Muhammad Fayyaz on left lower thigh then, Sajjad fired at Muhammad Fayyaz which hit the dorsal of right foot , which was broken. Abdul Salam fired at his son Muhammad Yar which hit on his left shoulder then Mehdi fired at Muhammad Yar which hit on his lower belly.

[7] As a result , both of his sons fell down and while lying on the ground , accused Inayat gave hatche t blow to Muhammad Fayyaz on the right shin/calf . Abid caused hatche t injury to Muhammad Yar on his right shoulder and thereafter , accus ed Masood, Abid, Bila l, Afz aal Mehdi alias Bodi and Khushi Muhammad gave hatche ts blows to both of his sons o ne after another as a result both sustained serious injuries on the mandible, neck, forehead and skull and after satisf ying that both had died , threaten ed us no t to come near them otherwise , they w ould meet the same fate.

[8] Motive for the crime has been shown enmity between the two families. 4. On this report , FIR No.65 was registered for crimes under sections /149 PPC by police station Sarai Alamgir District Gujrat. 5. The Investigating Officer , inspected the spot and recovered blood stained e arth from the place s of the two deceased while on 29.3.2003 , at the instance of Sajjad accused , .8 mm, rifle was also recovered from his residential house. 6.

[9] On 29.3.2003 at the instance of Mehdi accused one rifle apparently of Kalashnikov shape, was recover ed from his house while , on the same date , at the instance of Abid accused a hatchet was Crl.As.324 - 4 recovered from his house which was found blood stained. Similarly, at the instance of accused Mehdi alias Bodi alleged crime hatche t was recovered from his house which too was blood sta ined.

[10] In the same fashion , at the instance of accused Masood alias Rana alle ged crime hatchet was recovered on the same da y from his house. All these were taken into possession vide recovery memos Ex -PE, Ex-:PF, Ex -PG, Ex - PH and Ex -PJ. 7. The dead bod ies along with injury sheets and inquest reports , were sent to mortuary , for postmortem examination under the supervision of escorting constables.

[11] Autopsy on both the dead bodies was conducted on the same date but at 11.00 pm and 11.30 pm respectively. 8. Rough site plan and scale site plan were prepared , during spot inspection eight crime empties of .8-mm rifle were secured from near the two dead bodies and taken into possession vide memo -Ex-PT. 9.

[12] At the conclusion of the investigation , charge sheet was submitted to the trial court , where , the prosecution examined 12 PWs in all and after recording the statement of the accused under section 342 Cr.PC ., accused Zar aat, Mehdi, Sajjad and Abdul Salam wer e sentenced to death on two counts while accused Masood, Bilal, Afza al, Mehdi, Khushi Muhammad and Abid were awarded life imprisonment.

[13] All the accused were also awarded three years R.I. under section 148 PPC, however, accused sentenced to life imprisonment , were given benefit of Section 382-B Cr.PC. 10. The convict appellants fi led criminal appeal No. while the trial court sent a Murder Reference No.. On the Crl.As.324 - 5 other hand , the complainant , filed Criminal Revision Petition No. , in the Lahore High Court, Lahore. 11.

[14] Through , the impugned judgment dated 17.6.2010 , the appeal of present appellants (Criminal Appeal No. ) i.e. of Mehdi, Masood alias Rana, Sajjad and Afzaal Mehdi was dismissed . 12. Admittedly, there was a longstanding enmity between the parties , therefore , we have to see as to what extent the witnesses who were inimical to the accused , are supported by any corroboratory evidenc e of independen t and un -impeachable nature. 13.

[15] In the r idder to the FIR, the Investigating Officer has mentioned that the compla inant Muhammad F aazil met him somewhere in the way while proceeding to the police station. In past, it had become routine practice of the police that indeed in such like crimes , the FIR/written co mplaint s were being taken on the crime spot after preliminar y investigation, however, after this court had disapproved this practice , they have invented a new way of misleading the court of law because invariably, in every second or third case , same a nd similar practice is adopted but with newly invented methodolog y. 14.

[16] In the inquest report of Muhammad Fayyaz , the time of death is shown 12.40 noon on 22.2.2003 , while in the FIR , the time of occurrence is shown 11.00 am which lasted only for few min utes. The same time of death is given in the case of Muhammad Yar -deceased in the inquest report. Both the inquest reports were prepared on the crime spot as has been shown on the last page of each one .

[17] In column No.23 , no crime empty has been shown present there, albeit in the Crl.As.324 - 6 recovery memo and in the site plan , these e mpties had been shown recovered lying very close to both the dead bodies. Th is deliberate omission , create s reasonable doubts about the recovery . 15. Another intriguing aspect of the matter is that , according to the FIR, all the ac cused encircled the com plainant, the PWs and the two deceased thus, the apparent object was that none could escape alive.

[18] The complainant being father of the two deceased and the head of the family was supposed to be the prime target . In fact he has vigorously pursued the case against the accused and also depose d against them as an eye witness. The site plan position s would show that, he and the other PWs were at the mercy of the assailants but being the prime target even no threat was extended to him .

[19] Blessing him with unbelieva ble courtesy and mercy shown to him by the accused knowing well that he and the witnesses would depose against them by leaving them unhurt , is absolutely unbelievable story. Such behavior , on the part of the accused , runs counter to natur al human conduct a nd behavior explained in the provision s of Article 129 of the Qanun -e-Shahadat, Order 1984, therefore, the court is unable to accept such unbelievable proposition. 16.

[20] The site plan would further show that, the complainant party was having no land near o r around the crime spot and even the cattle -shed where , they were , allegedly sitting , was belong ing to one Nazir Ahmad, therefore, the claim of the complainant that they took a round of their crop prior to the occurrence , stood falsified .

[21] This was the only purpose for the complainant and the PWs to be present with the deceased which has not been established through any Crl.As.324 - 7 documentary or other evidence. The second eye witness namely Muhammad Sharif (PW -9) undeniably belongs to another village. It was suggested to him by the defence that his village is 30 -Kilometer away from the crime spot.

[22] Although he denied the same but the witness was attempting to conceal the true distance as is evident from the observation recorded by the trial court (page -76), therefore, he can be construed as a chance witness. The defen ce also suggested to him that his daughter is married to the nephew of the complainant which he denied.

[23] He also admitted that  cattle lifting cases were registered against him, however, he denied that one case was register ed against him by the Zaraat accused/appellant. He also admitted that while coming from his village to the village of the complainant , river Jhelum intervenes. This witness , has also made dishonest improveme nts in his statement at the tria l from the one he had given to the police under section 161 Cr.P.C.

[24] He has further admitted that , after arrival of the police at the spot , the statement of the complainant was recorded first thus, it provide strength to the view of the Court that FIR was l odged at crime spot after deliberation and consultations. 17. In ordinary parlance, a chance witness is the one who , in the normal course is not supposed to be present on the crime spot unless he offers cogent, conv incing and believable explanation , justifying his presence there. 18.

[25] In the instant case , this witness has shown no work or definite purpose of visit to crime spot , therefore, his presence on the crime spot is not believable and his testimony , for th is reason alone is Crl.As.324 - 8 rejected. More so, when for reach ing the spot, he had confronted surging waves of fast flowing water of the river.

[26] A single doubt reasonably showing that a witness/witnesses ’ presen ce on the crime spot was doubtful when a tragedy t akes place, would be sufficient to discard his /their testimony as a whole. This principle may be pressed into service in cases where such witness/witnesses are seriously inimical or appears to be a chance witness because judicial mind would remain disturb ed about the truthfulness of the testimony of such witness es provid e in a murder case, is a fundamental principle of our criminal justice system. 19.

[27] As discussed earlier, the complainant was at the mercy of the accused as according to his version he alongwith the two deceased was encircled and was under direct and immediate threat of death but he was still able to give photograph ic narration of the occurrence by attributing individual role to each one of the several accused inflicting injuries with hatch ets and fire arms on specifi c parts of the bodie s of the two deceased.

[28] This fact , by itself is sufficient , to disbelieve his presence at the crime spot at the fateful time. 20. As we have already declared that , investigation conducted in this case , was neither fair nor honest, therefore, the recovery effect ed of the so -called crime weapons has also lost its legal worth which otherwise, is not implicating the appellants except Sajjad. 21.

[29] It is also pe rtinent to mention here, that the attesting witness to all these recoveries of incriminating articles is Muhammad Sharif (PW -9) whose testimony we have already disbelieved as a whole. It is fundamental principle of justice that corroborat ory Crl.As.324 - 9 evidence , must come from independent source providing strength and endorsement to the account of the eye witnesses, therefore, eye witnesses , in the absence of extraordinary and very exceptional and rare circumstances , cannot corroborate th emselves by becoming attesting witness/ witnesses to the recovery of crime articles.

[30] In other words, eye witnesses cannot corroborat e th emselves but corroboratory evidence must come from independent source and shall be supported by independent witnesses other than eye witnesses, thus, these recoveries are equally of no judicial efficacy. 22. In this case, s ome of the accused have been killed/murdered allegedly by the complainant party and some died during imprisonment thus, the private execution to death of some of the accused , by the complainant party , would suggest that they themselves took the revenge from those , who were involved in the crime albeit , the learned counsel for the complainant strongly opposed this view but he was unable to controvert that some of the acquitted accused have been killed. 23.

[31] In view of the analysis and combined study of the entire evidence by way of reappraisal , with much care and ca ution, we are of the considered view , that the prosecution has failed to prove its case against the appellants beyond any reasonable doubt, therefore, this appeal (Criminal Appeal No.) is allowed and while extending benefit of doubt to the appellants , they are acquitted of all the charges leveled against them.

[32] For the reasons given above , Criminal Appeal No. filed by Mst. Rukhsana Begum is dismissed. 24. These are the detailed reasons for our short order of even date 25.1.2017 which is reproduced below: Crl.As.324 - 10 “Criminal Appeal No. 324 of 2011: For reasons to be recorded later, this appeal is dismissed.

[33] Criminal Appeal No. 325 of 2011: Per report of the Superintendent, District Prison, Gujrat and as was admitted at t he bar by the learned ASC for the appellants, S ajjad son of Muhammad Inayat one of the appellants has died, therefore, to his extent this appeal stands abated, while the convictions and sentences awarded to other appellants/accused, namely, Mehdi son of In ayat, Afzaal Mehdi son of Mehdi Khan and Masood alias Rana son of Adalat Khan by the learned High Court vide the impugned judgment dated 17.6.2010 are set aside and they are acquitted of all the charges leveled against them.

[34] They be set free forthwith, if not required in any other case. Detail reasons to follow separately. ” Judge Judge Judge Islamabad, the 25th January, 2017 Sarfraz/ -‘ ‘APPROVED FOR REPORTING’