Case No: Crl.P.L.A.1154/2021
Case Title: Umer Khan v. The State thr. A.G. Islamabad and another
Subject: Bail After Arrest
Judge: Mr. Justice Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi
Judgment Date: 01-11-2021
Upload Date: 26-11-2021
Citations: 2022 SCMR 216
SC Citations: 2021 SCP 335
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.p._1154_2021.pdf

[1] order dated 30.08.2021 passed by the Peshawar High Court, P eshawar in Cr.MBA No. 798 - A/2021 ) Umer Khan … Petitioner VERSUS The State and another … Respondents For the Petitioner: Raja Faisal Younas Abbasi, ASC For the State: Syed Nayyab Hussain Gardezi, DAG Mr. Basit, I.O Date of Hearing: 01.11.2021 ORDER SAYYED MAZAHAR ALI AKBAR NAQVI, J. - Through the instant petition under Article 185(3) of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, the petitioner has assailed the order dated 30.08.2021 passed by the learned Single Judge of the Peshawar High Court, Peshawar, with a prayer to grant post -arrest bail in case registered vide FIR No.  dated 06.07.2021 under Section 22(1) of Prevention of Electronic Crimes Act , 2016 at Police Station Cyber Crimes Reporting Center, Abbottabad, in the inter est of safe administration of criminal justice. 2.

[2] Briefly stated the allegation against the petitioner is that he was sharing child pornographic content on the Facebook through his mobile. On receipt of the information from the Facebook, the matter was i nquired into by the F ederal Investigating Agency and after its conclusion the aforesaid FIR was registered and the petitioner was apprehended. 3.

[3] At the very outset, it has been argued by learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner has been f alsely roped in this case against the actual facts and circumstances of this case. Contends that there is no direct evidence to show that the petitioner CRIMINAL PETITION NO. 1154 OF 2021 2 has shared the pornographic content on Facebook.

[4] Contends that no victim has been associated in the pre sent case. Lastly contends that the maximum punishment for the offence with which the petitioner is charged with is seven years and the same does not fall within the prohibitory clause, therefore, the petitioner may be released on bail. 4. On the other h and, learned Law Officer has defended the impugned order whereby post -arrest bail has b een declined to the petitioner.

[5] He contended that the petitioner has committed a heinous offence and there is sufficient material available on record to connect him with the commission of the crime, therefore, he does not deserve any leniency by this Court. 5. We have heard learned counsel for the parties at some length and have perused the record with their assistance.

[6] As per the contents of the crime report, the al legation leveled against the petitioner is that he was involved in sharing child pornographic content through his Facebook profile via his mobile device. There is no denial to this fact that it was the Facebook Authorit y who had contacted Federal Investiga ting Agency and had provided the information against the petitioner, upon which the FIA had inquired into the matter.

[7] The mobile phone of the petitioner was taken into possession and was sent to Forensic Science Laboratory and according to the report of th e FSL, the Facebook profile of the petitioner was found active on his mobile phone and child pornographic videos and images were also extracted from his mobile phone.

[8] The mobile numbers which the petitioner was using in his mobile device were also found ac tive and the same were registered in his name. We have noticed that o ne of the most alarming social evil prevailing in the society is child pornography. It has created a havoc in society as it contains a great threat to morality and the future of children.

[9] One of the reason for the rise of child abuse/rape cases is squarely because of child pornographic content. The concerns regarding child sexual abuse and exploitation have been prevailing in the society in the past also. However, due to various factors, t he gravity and impact of the offense of child pornography is increasing at an alarming rate and this menace needs to be curbed with iron hands.

[10] Although the offence with which the petitioner has been charged with does not fall within the prohibitory clause of CRIMINAL PETITION NO. 1154 OF 2021 3 Section 497 Cr.P.C. and the maximum punishment for the same is seven years but keeping in view the nature of accusation , its impact on the society and the material collect ed so far merits the case to fall within the exception of granting bail when the offence falls within the non -prohibitory clause.

[11] Otherwise, it is not an absolute principle of law. So far as the argument of learned counsel for the petitioner that no victim has been associated in the case is concerned, the allegation against the petitio ner is of spreading child pornographic videos and not of making them . Since when he was doing this act and how many children’s videos has he shared so far is yet to be determined.

[12] In any case, it is a crime to hollow out the society, therefore, the argumen t of the learned counsel for the petitioner is of no help to the petitioner. Even otherwise, thi s petition is barred by 03 days and no plausible explanation for the condonation of the delay has been given. 6. For what has been discussed above, this peti tion having no merit is accordingly dismissed and leave to appeal is refused.

[13] Before parting with the order, we direct the learned Trial Court to proceed with the trial expeditiously and conclude the same as early as possible. JUDGE JUDGE Islamaba d, the 1st of November, 2021 Approved For Reporting Khurram