Case No: Crl.A.75-L/2017
Case Title: Tariq Mehmood v. The State etc
Subject: Death Sentence/Sessions
Judge: MR. JUSTICE QAZI MUHAMMAD AMIN AHMED
Judgment Date: N/A
Upload Date: 25-05-2019
Citations: 2019 SCMR 1170
SC Citations: 2019 SCP 123
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Crl.A._75_L_2017.pdf

[1] judgment dated 22.04.2014 passed by the Lahore High Court, Lahore in Crimina l Appeals No.1098 & 1116 of 200 9, Murder Reference No.291 of 2009 and Criminal Revision No.866 of 20 09). Tariq Mehmood …Appellant(s) VERSUS The State, etc. …Respondent(s) For the Appellant(s) : Mr. Munir Ahmed Bhatti , ASC For the Complainant(s) : Mr.

[2] Azam Nazeer Tarar, ASC For the State : Mr. Mazhar Sher Awan, Additional Prosecutor General Date of Hearing : 09.05.2019 JUDGMENT Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J Tariq Mehmood, appellant was tried alongside Wasee m Saj jad, Amjad Sar dar, Israr Ahmad, Ghulam Ali, Si kandar Hayat and Mst. M ehnaz Akhtar by a learned Additional Sessions Judge at Mandi Baha -ud-din for committing qatl-e-amd of Saif -ur-Rehman , deceased in addition to murderous assau lt on Farhan, PW and abduction of Mst.

[3] Tehmina Akram, PW ; of them Ghulam Ali, Sikandar Hayat, Israr Ahmad and Mst. Mehnaz Akram were acquitted from the charge , whereas the appellant, Was eem Sajjad and Amjad Sa rdar were returned a guilty verdict. For homici de, the appellant was sentenced to death under clause (b) of Section 302 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860, whereas Was eem Sajjad and Amjad Sa rdar to imprisonment for life for being in the community of intention along with compensation of Criminal Appeal No. 75-L of 2017 . 2 Rs.100,000/ - each; for murderous assault , the accused were sentenced to ten years R.I. each with fine of Rs.10 ,000/ - and for abduction each was sentenced to seven years R.I. with fine of Rs.20 ,000/ -; sentences were ordered to run concurrently with benefit of Section 382-B of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 .

[4] A learned Division Bench of Lahore High Court vide impugned judgment dated 22.04.2014 dismissed convicts’ appeals; a revision for enhancement of sentences met the same fate. It would be pertinent to point out that du ring pendency of the appeal , Waseem Sajjad, convict was released on bail by way of execution of sentence on 30.11.2011 ; the release warrant was however inadvertently in favour of Amjad Sardar, convict as well, in pursuance whereto both of them were enlarg ed on bail ; they are away from law ever since .

[5] The learned High Court dismissed their appeal, however without reference to their departure from the array. 2. Prosecution ’s case is structured upon statemen t of Muhammad Na uman, PW -4; according to him , durin g the fateful night at 8:15 p.m. the appellant along with co -accused , differently armed , trespassed into his home; they attempted to forcibly take away Samina Akram; upon family ’s resistance, Was eem Sajjad, co- accused made a fire shot on Muhammad Farhan, P W on his right flank ; as complainant and Saif -ur-Rehman attempted to rescue the girl the appellant fired upon Saif-ur-Rehman , deceased followed by a fire shot by Amjad Sardar; former , twice hit by the both, one by one; accused decamped with Samina Akram wi thin witnesses’ view, recovered unscathed by the police after twenty days of the occurrence .

[6] The assailants avenged a suspected liaison between Muhammad Usman , PW with appellant’s cousin . Dissatisfied with investigation, the complainant preferred to prosec ute the case through a private complaint. 3. Ocular account furnished by Muhammad Nau man, Muhammad Farhan and Mst. Tehmina Akram , PWs constitutes prosecution ’s mainstay .

[7] Of them Muhammad Farhan sustained injury , substantially extensive in nature. Occurre nce took place inside a residential premises. First sight cannot escape Criminal Appeal No. 75-L of 2017 . 3 preponderance of evidence, however on a closer view, emerges a picture in compatible with the events , narrated in the crime report .

[8] The a ccused mounted assault , as per prosecution ’s own case to settle score with Muhammad Usman, PW for his alleged affair with the lady related to the appellant; it is disgrace that brought the assailants, face to face, with Muhammad Usman, PW , well within their view and reach it is astonishing that while be ing merciless without restraint upon others they spared prime target of assault .

[9] There can be no other inference that either Muhammad Usman was not present at the scene or the occurrence took place in a backdrop other than asserted in the crime report . More intriguing is recovery of Mst. Tehmina Akram, PW ; according to her, she remained in captivity for twenty days , the poor soul was taken away to settle score for what her brother had done to a lady of assailants , a conduct repugnant , by all means , nonethel ess, no one laid a finger upon the girl despite being at their mercy ; she returned unharmed .

[10] It is mind boggling that after having shed so much blood why the lady was kept under immunity. Such superior conduct is not expected from the accused when the enti re exercise was calculated to disgrace the family . Statement of Mst. Tehmina Akram is contradicted by Rana Muhammad Aslam, Inspector, CW - 1, the investigating officer ; according to him, Mst.

[11] Tehmina Akram rejoined the family on her own without intervention of the police . In the witness box, she was confronted with her previous statement wherein she had blamed one Farooq alias Farooqi Thabal as primarily responsible for the crime though she denied, this fact was recorded by investigating officer in her previo us statement.

[12] The investigating officer categorically stated in his examination -in-chief that the aforesaid Farooq alias Farooqi Thabal was principally responsible for the crime; a hired assassin , subsequently killed in a police encounter . Occurrence , stat edly, took place on 20.1.20 05 at 8.15 p.m. however autopsy was conducted following day at 11.45 a.m .; interregnum space s the hypothesis of consultations/deliberations.

[13] What actually happened during the fateful night is left to our imagination. Even the lea rned trial Judge has not believed prosecution evidence qua majority of the accused . Once we have found the genesis o f prosecution case Criminal Appeal No. 75-L of 2017 . 4 as inherently suspect , loss of life notwithstanding , we consider it grievously unsafe to maintain the conviction s in a case fraught with improbabilities and positions, each self destructive .

[14] Criminal appeal is allowed, impugned judgment is set aside. The appellant shall be released forthwith, if not required in any other case. JUDGE JUDGE Lahore , the 09th of May, 2019 Ghulam Raza /* JUDGE