Case No: Crl.P.L.A.170/2013
Case Title: Haseeba Taimoor Afridi v. The State & another
Subject: Bail After Arrest
Judge: MR. JUSTICE IJAZ AHMED CHAUDHRY
Judgment Date: 05-06-2013
Upload Date: 05-06-2013
Citations: 2013 SCMR 1326
SC Citations: 2013 SCP 65
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Crl.P.170of2013-dt-5-6-2013.pdf

[1] ORDER Heard learned counsel for the parties. Learned Additional Prosecutor General candidly conceded that so far prosecution has not collected incriminating evidence against the petitioner to ju stify her involvement/detention. 2. We fail to understand that when there was no incriminating evidence as to why the police caused the arrest of Crl.P.  2 the petitioner who is stated to be of 15 years of age and subsequent thereto despite of subjecting her to i nvestigation no evidence was brought on record then why she was sent to judicial lockup.

[2] In this behalf the Supervisory Officer, responsible to monitor the investigation of the subordinate officers, is equally responsible. Not only this, the Magistrate Raja Faisal Rasheed who had been granting remand, should have also looked into the file instead of remanding the petitioner to police custody without any justification.

[3] Under section 167 Cr.P.C. it is the duty of the Magistrate to satisfy himself that there are grounds for believing that the accusation or information is well founded for justifying custody of an accused with the police. 3. In the circumstances we allow ad -interim bail to the petitioner Haseeba Taimoor Afridi d/o Taimoor Afridi subject to her furnishing personal bond in the sum of Rs.5,000/ - (Rupees five thousand) only to the satisfaction of the Ilaqua Magistrate. 4.

[4] Explanation be called for from the SSP In -charge of Investigation, the SHO as well as the Investigating Officer/Officers, named above, to state the reason for causing arrest and detention of the petitioner . 5. The Magistrate shall also send his explanation through the Sessions Judge, Rawalpindi, to explain as to why without adhering to the relevant provisions of law, note d Crl.P.  3 hereinabove, in a mechanical manner police remand was granted permission of judicial remand was granted followed by judicial remand as presently she is in custody in Adiala Jail .