Case No: Crl.A.496/2009
Case Title: Azeem Khan v. Mujahid Khan & others
Subject: Sentence/Enhancement of (in ATA/STA Cases)
Judge: MR. JUSTICE DOST MUHAMMAD KHAN
Judgment Date: 15-10-2015
Upload Date: 28-11-2015
Citations: 2016 SCMR 274
SC Citations: 2015 SCP 93
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Crl.A._496_2009.pdf

[1] judgment da ted 1.6.2009 passed by the Lahore High Court, Rawalpindi Bench Rawalpindi in Crl.A.144 -T/2007, Crl.Revision.62 -T/2007 & CSR.No.50 -T/2007). 1. Azeem Khan …Appellant in Crl.A. 2. Mujahid Khan & another …Appellant s in Crl.A. VERSUS 1. Mujahid Khan & others …Respondents in Crl.A. 2. The State …Respondent in Crl.A.

[2] For the appellant s: Agha Muhammad Ali, ASC (In Crl.A.) For the complainant : Sardar Muhammad Ishaq Khan, Sr. ASC For the State: Mr. Ahmad Ra za Gillani, ASC Date of hearing: 15.10.2015 JUDGMENT Dost Muhammad Khan, J -. The appellants (i) Mujahid Khan and (ii) Arbab Khan, at a trial held by the learned Presiding Judge of Anti Terrorism Court-II, Rawalpindi, upon c onviction U/Ss.36 5-A and 302 PPC read with Section 7 of Anti Terrorism Act, 1997, were handed down sentence(s) of death u/s 365-A PPC and S.7(e) of ATA.

[3] Additionally , appellant Mujahid Khan was convicted and was sentenced to death u/s 302(b) PPC. The properties of the appellants were also ordered to be forfeited. 2. Both the appellants filed appeal before the Lahore High Court, Rawalpindi Bench, Rawalpindi, which was heard along with Murder Reference No.50 -T/2007 as well as Criminal Revision No.62 - T/2007 filed by the com plainant and vide impugned judgment dated Crl.As.496- 2 01.06.2009 , the appeal of the appellants was dismissed and the Reference sent by the Trial Court u/s 374 Cr.P.C. was answered in affirmative, however, the Criminal Revision Petition of the complainant was dismissed . 3.

[4] Both these appeals have been filed with leave of the Court dated 27.08.2009. The order is self speaking and elaborate one. We have heard Sardar Muhammad Ishaq Khan, learned Sr.ASC for the complainant , Agha Muhammad Ali, learned ASC for the appell ants in Crl.A. No. and Mr. Ahmad Raza Gillani, learned Additional Prosecutor General, Punjab and have carefully gone through the evidence on record. 4.

[5] Precise but relevant facts are that , a pre -teen nephew of the complainant, Khan Wali (PW -4), namely Muhammad Bilal (deceased) aged about  years went missing on 16.07.2006. In the crime report (Ex -PH/1) the complainant expressed apprehension that his nephew was probably kidnapped. After registration of the crime report, Nazar Muhammad SI, Poli ce Post Naseerabad inspected the spot and prepared the site plan thereof.

[6] In the meanwhile a cell phone call was r eceived by Muhammad Wali (PW -3); the caller used cell phone No.0302 -5665028 and the receiving cell phone number of Muhammad Wali was 0300 -9866033. The caller demanded Rs.25,00,000/ - however, bargain was st ruck at Rs.3,00,000/ -, which amount was delivered by leaving it at the place told by the caller to Muhammad Wali (PW -3).

[7] At this stage section 365 -A PPC was added to the charge. The Investigati ng Officer obtained phone calls data of both the cell phone s from the mobile company through one Rana Shahid Parvez, DSP on 03.08.2006. On 17.08.2006 bo th the appellants were arrested. D uring interrogation the appellants jointly disclosed that they had mur dered the abductee Muhammad Bilal on 5th day of his Crl.As.496- 3 abduction at 12: 00 midnight by chocking his mouth and the dead body was then buried in a ditch however, on 22.07.2006 they had received an amount of Rs.3,00,000/ - as ransom money from Muhammad Wali PW, wh o is the son of the complainant.

[8] The appellants further disclosed that after abduction of the deceased on 16.07.2006, they tied him with a tree, situated on the bank of flood channel. The abductee was killed because he used to raise hue and cries. 5. After the said disclosure, both the appellants were jointly taken to Tarnol area where they pointed out the place of crime , wherefrom mud stained torn ‘shalwar’ , shirt and a pair of slippers, allegedly belonging to the deceased were recovered along with a wrapper of candies/toffees.

[9] A strip containing six pills was recovered from the pocket of the shirt of the deceased. These articles were identified by the father and cousin (Muhammad Wali) to be of Muhammad Bilal deceased on the spot. 12 pieces of bone s were also recovered from the crime spot through a recovery memo and were sealed into one and the same parcel.

[10] A Suzuki Mehran Car No .FDO 5481 with registration book was recovered from appellant Mujahid Khan besides, the cell phone with SIM No.0302 -5071540 wa s also recovered from appellant Arbab Khan on his personal search. 6. Both the appellants made judicial confession before Ch. Muhammad Taufiq, Magistrate on 18.08.2006 however, against the procedure as required under the law, they were handed over back to the same police officer , who got further physical custody of both the appellants on the same day from the Anti Terrorism Court, Rawalpindi. 7.

[11] Besides the a bove, appellant Mujahid Khan had also made extra-judicial confession before Haji Muhammad Ashra f (PW -8), the Crl.As.496- 4 close relative of the complainant, on 16.07.2006 at 11:00 am at Rawalpindi, however, Muhammad Ashraf instead of informing the complainant through any source including cell phone call , decided to proceed to Peshawar where , he had allegedly str uck a bargain with regard to the purchase of property.

[12] According to him , he was required to pay the earnest money to the seller and w hen he came back, he informed the complainant on the following day about the said fact . 8. At the trial , Muhammad Wali ( PW-3) had stated that , on 17.08.2006 , they were present with the police party , headed by the Investigating Officer who got information that both the appellants were coming to Rawalpindi in the Suzuki Mehran Car, mentioned above, thus, the police laid barri cade at Tarnol and both the appellants, on reaching there , were intercepted and arrested.

[13] Contrary to the police statement, this witness has further stated at the trial that both the appellants were taken to the crime spot one after another and at their pointation the above crime articles, clothes and pair of slippers were recovered there from, which were taken through separate memos, Ex - PA and Ex.PB. 9.

[14] The bones recovered, were sent to the Forensic Science Laboratory, Lahore however, Dr. Manzoor Hussain , Resear ch Officer of Molecular Biology , University of Punjab, Lahore (PW -13) stated that he received 21 numbers of bones and in addition thereto teeth as well , however, these were not shown in Ex.PA .

[15] At the instance of Arbab Khan appellant, an amount of R s.150,000/ - was recovered from an iron box in his house. The attesting witnesses to the recovery memo (Ex.PG) are the complainant and Muhammad Wali, who have played very active role in the course of furt hering the investigation of the case. Crl.As.496- 5 10.

[16] On the ot her hand, Dr. Manzoor Hussain (PW -13) brought on record the positive result of the DNA Test (Ex -PR) on the basis of samples, taken from Azeem Khan and Mst. Khi yal Bibi, the parents of the deceased with the recovered pieces of bones and teeth . 11. At the conclusion of investigation, charge sheet was filed against the appellants in the Trial Court, which ended in the conviction of both the appellants stated above. 12.

[17] The summary of the above detail would show that the prosecution has placed reliance on the following pieces of evidence: - (i) The cell -phone data, collected from the cellular company, of both the cell phones, the one allegedly belonging to appellant Arbab Khan and the other to Muhammad Wali (PW -3); (ii) The judicial confession of both the a ppellants recorded by the Magistrate; (iii) The extra -judicial confession made by one of the appellants, namely , Mujahid Khan, before Haji Muhammad Ashraf (PW -8), Vice President, “Anjuman -e- Tajran, Bara Market” Rawalpindi ; (iv) The recovery of the bones (12 in number), clothes and slippers of the deceased from the crime spot; (v) The recovery of money from the house of the above appellant; (vi) The recovery of Suzuki Mehran Car, which one of the appellants had allegedly purchased from unknown seller , paying a portion of the ransom money; and (vii) Positive result of the DNA test. 13.

[18] Undeniably, it is an un -witnessed crime. The entire edifice of the prosecution case is based on circumstantial evidence and Crl.As.496- 6 recovery of the alleged incriminating articles, detail of which is given above. 14. The judicial confession s, allegedl y made by both the appellants are the material piece of evidence in the prosecution hand, therefore, we would deal with the same in the first instance. 15.

[19] Keeping in view the High Court Rules, laying down a binding procedure for taking required precaution s and observing the requirements of the provision of section 364 read with section 164 Cr.P.C. by now it has become a trite law that before recording confession and that too in cri mes entailing capital punishment, the Recording Magistrate has to essentially observe all the se mandatory precautions.

[20] The fundam ental logic behind the same is that, all signs of fear inculcated by the Investigating Agency in the mind of the accused are to be shedded out and he is to be provided full assurance that in case he is not guilty or is not making a confession voluntarily then in that case, he would not be handed over back to the police.

[21] Thereafter, sufficient time for reflection is to be given aft er the first warning is administered. At the expiry of that time , Recording Magistrate has to administer the second warning and the accused shall be assured that now he was in the safe hands. All police officials whether in un iform or otherwise, including Naib Court attached to the Court must be kept outside the Court and beyond the view of the accused.

[22] After observing all these legal requirements if the accused person is willing to confess then, all required question s formulated by the High Court Rules sh ould be put to him and the answer s given, be recorded in the words spoken by him. T he statement of accused be recorded by the Magistrate with his own hand and in case there is a genuine compelling reason then, a special note is to be given that the Crl.As.496- 7 same was dictated to a responsible official of the Court like Stenographer or Reader and oath shall also be administered to such official that he would correctly type or write the true and correct version, the accused stated and dictated by the Magistrate.

[23] In case , the accused is illiterate, the confession he makes, if recorded in another language i.e. Urdu or English then, after its completion , the same be read -over and explained to him in the language, the accused fully understand and thereafter a certifi cate, as required u/s 364 Cr.P.C . with regard to these proceedings be given by the Magistrate under his seal and signatures and the accused shall be sent to jail on judicial remand and during this process at no occasion he shall be handed over to any police offici al/officer whether he is Naib Court wearing police uniform , or any other police official/officer, because such careless dispensation would considerably diminish the voluntary nature of the confession , made by the accused. 16.

[24] In the instant case, the Re cording Magistrate namely, Ch. Taufiq Ahmed did not observe least precautions, required under the law. He was so careless that the confessions of both the appellants were recorded on oath , grossly violating the law, the same , therefore, has render ed the co nfession inadmissible which cannot be safely relied upon keeping in view the principle of safe administration of justice. 17.

[25] The Recording Magistrate committed successive illegalities one after the other as after recording the confessions of the appell ants on oath , both were handed over to the same police officer, who had produced them in the Court in handcuffs. This fact bespeaks volumes that the Recording Magistrate was either not knowing the law on the subject or he was acting in the police way desir ed by it , compromising his judicial obligations.

[26] This careless attitude of the Magistrate Crl.As.496- 8 provided premium to the Investigating Agency because it was thereafter , that the recoveries of the so -called incriminating articles were made at the instance of the a ppellants , detail of which is mentioned above. 18. In our considered view , the confession s of both the appellants for the above reasons are of no legal worth, to be relied upon and are excluded from consideration , more so, when these were retracted at t he trial .

[27] Confessions of this nature , which were retracted by the appellants , cannot mutually corroborate each other on the principle that one tainted evidence cannot corroborate the other tainted piece of evidence. Similar view was taken by this Court in the case of Muhammad Bakhsh v. The State (PLD 1956 SC 420) , while in the case of Khuda Bux v.

[28] The Crown (1969 SCMR 390) the confession made , was held not voluntary because the accused in that case was remanded back to the police after making confession. 19. Both the confessions of the appellants prima facie appear to be untrue because the same are clashing with the story set up by prosecution witnesses on material particulars of the case.

[29] In the confession of Mujahid Khan it is stated that Arb ab Khan co -accused contacted Haj i Azeem Khan (father of the deceased) on phone and demanded an amount of Rs.25,00,000/ - from him as ransom money also telling him that he will call back. While, Muhammad Wali (PW-3) stated that it was he who was contacted by the accused on cell phone in this regard four times on different dates and he struck the bargain at Rs.3,00,000/ - which amount he placed at the point , told to him by the accused.

[30] The cell phone data collected by the police is with regard to the two cell -phones, one i s attributed to Arbab Khan appellant and the other to PW Muhammad Wali. At the relevant time, Azeem Khan, Crl.As.496- 9 father of the deceased was abroad and only the complainant , Khan Wali and his son Muhammad Wali have been shown inter acting with the caller on phone.

[31] The contradiction pointed out , is of a serious nature thus, has demolished the story given in the confessions of the appellants and has rendered the same of no legal efficacy . Appellant Mujahid Khan has disclosed in his confession that with the share of th e ransom money he purchased Alto Taxi Car but a car of different make (Suzuki Mehran) was recovered .

[32] This aspect of the matter was also not investigated to trace out the seller of the car besides, the time and date of the bargain of purchase of the car was also not brought on record . Similarly, appellant Arbab Khan stated in his confessional statement that he had spent the money on his engagement with a girl.

[33] Neither the name of the girl has been brought on record nor of her family members i.e. parents , to corroborate this aspect of the matter. Such evidence would have provided enough corroboration what was stated in the confession but it appears that, the same was deliberately withheld therefore, adverse inference is to be drawn against the prosecution.

[34] In his confession (Ex -PM), appellant Mujahid Khan has stated that he and Arbab Khan both were called on phone by th e police and were then arrested, while PW -3, stated at the trial that both the appellants were arrested during snap checking on a barricade , laid near Tarnol. The above contradiction is of a grave nature, which cannot be lightly ignored.

[35] At the trial, the Recording Magistrate made crude attempt s to rectify the wrong/illegalities, he had committed in record ing the two confessions however, the law o f evidence is clear on this point that documentary evidence shall prevail over the oral statement made at a subsequ ent stage, contradicting the contents of documents.

[36] Therefore, his belated statement at the trial cannot be safely relied upon . The subsequen t statement of the Recording Crl.As.496- 10 Magistrate created many doubts and had made both the confessions highly doubtful. In the circumstances the principle of re -benefit of doubt is attracted, which has to be extended to the appellants and not the prosecution.

[37] The q uestionnaire would show that many mandatory questions were not put to the appellants like duration of police custody and that they would not be given back to the police whether they record the confession or not. This is another infirmity of a serious natur e, diminishing the voluntary nature of the confession to naught . 20.

[38] Leaving apart the above inf irmities , Mujahid Khan, according to his confession, was a conductor on a Dumper while Arbab Khan was employed in a local hotel near Tarnol. In both the confessions , the appellants have stated that due to poverty they decided to commit the crime of abduction for ransom however, the investigative agency did not record the statement s of the driver/owner of the Dumper and the proprietor of the hotel where the accused were employed.

[39] Thus, beside others, this important link is missing in the chain for lack of corroborative evidence. Moreover, when both the appellants had spent their share of ransom money , then how an amount of Rs.150,000/ - was recovered from appella nt Arbab Khan. 21. In both the confessions , it is stated that the abductee was immediately taken out to an open place and he was tied with a tree.

[40] One of the appellants , Mujahid Khan used to stay with h im at night but at day time he used to leave behind the abductee all alone . Such unnatural conduct could not be believed as any passerby could come across and would have released the abductee. Such a fantastic story , bereft of logic, can only be believed by a blind or imprudent man because it was the abduct ee, on whom the appellants were to encash upon Rs.25,00,000/ - No one , who catches a big fish would let it to Crl.As.496- 11 swim again in the seawater because , its retrieval would be come absolutely impossible. 22.

[41] The cell phone call data collected is of no help to th e prosecution for the reasons that numerous calls have been made indicating continuous interacti on between the two cell phones, contrary to the evidence given by Muhammad Wali (PW -3), who has stated at the trial that the unknown caller made calls on his ce ll phone four times .

[42] No competent witness was produced at the trial , who provided the call data, Ex.P -1 to Ex.P -5. No voice record transcript has been brought on record. Similarly from which area the caller made the calls, is also not shown in it. Above al l, the most crucial and conclusive proof that the cell phone was owned by the accused and SIM allotted was in his name is also missing.

[43] In this view of the matter, this piece of evidence is absolutely inconclusive and of no benefit to the prosecution nor i t connect s the accused with the crime in any manner. 23. The extra-judicial confession , allegedly made by one of the accused before Haji Muhammad Ashraf (PW -8), Vice President of the “Anjuman -e-Tajran, Bara Market” Rawalpindi appears to be a concocted s tory because he admitted that the complainant is related to him and they reside in the same street.

[44] Appellant Mujahid Khan allegedly made extra judicial confession before him on 14.08.2006, however, he being closely related and having somewhat business c onnection with the complainant , did not inform him immediately although he was having a car with him at that time and also a cell phone, rather he decided to go to Peshawar and when he came back on the following day, instead of persuading the complainant K han Wali, under the direction of the latter, he Crl.As.496- 12 straight away went to Police Post Naseerabad and recorded his statement with the police against both the appellants.

[45] His plea that he had struck a bargain of property and was to pay earnest money therefore, he went to Peshawar thus, could not inform the complainant for that reason, is a fallacious one. Being a very serious matter and being a relative of the complainant and because the complainant was residing in Rawalpindi, few kilometers away from that place, when he got this information at 10:30 am on 14.08.2006, there was no impediment in his way to inform him directly or through phone .

[46] Peshawar city is roughly 100 kilometer away from Rawalpindi, if at all he was required to strike a bargain for purchase of p roperty, he could have reached there within 2 hours after disclosing this fact to the complainant. Even , the IO did not go to Peshawar to verify this assertion of the PW, as to whether he had gone to Peshawar for the above purpose and who was the seller of the property , with whom he had struck the bargain.

[47] No document about the bargain was produced to the Investigating Officer. Even otherwise, the story appears highly insensible and runs counter to natural human conduct and behaviour that the appellant , Mujahid Khan would have disclosed such a gruesome crime before this PW, involving the necks of both, knowing well that this witness was of no help to him /them because on record it is proved that this PW did not utter a single word to the complainant persuad ing him for re - conciliation and for settlement , rather after disclosing the fact of disclosure of the crime , the appellant had made to him, he (Haji Muhammad Ashraf) on the direction of the complainant went straight to the Police Post and recorded his stat ement with the Investigating Officer.

[48] This, in our considered opinion, appea rs to be a concocted Crl.As.496- 13 story. He being the relative of the complainant and also running the business in the same market , where the complainant do the same business, the appellant Muj ahid Khan would have never opted for disclosing such a gruesome crime to him, when by then the complainant party and the Investigating Agency, both were clueless about the crime of murder of the deceased and also about the actual culprits.

[49] This part of the evidence is nothing but a tailored story, which was arranged with the help of the Investigating Agency thus, it is of no legal worth and being absolutely unreliable is excluded from consideration. 24. It is a consistent view of the Courts that extra -judicial confession, if made before a person of influence and authority, expected to extend helping hand to the accused, which is also strongly corroborated, can only be considered as a piece of circumstantial evidence.

[50] This Court held so in the case of Noor Muhammad v. The State (1991 PSC 235). Such evidence is held to be the weakest type of evidence. No conviction on capital charge can be recorded on such evidence. 25. The recovery of 12 numbers of bones, shirt, shalwar and slippers of the deceased is also liable to be discarded.

[51] The recovery memo (Ex -PA) would show that father of the abductee , namely , Azeem Khan and PW Muhammad Wali are attesting witnesses to the same, who were naturally highly interested witnesses. Secondly, when this parcel was rece ived after about one month in the Forensic Science Laboratory, Lahore, the number s of bones were found 21 as have been shown in the report and in addition thereto, teeth were also received in the sealed parcel which , at no occasion was the case of the prosecution.

[52] Thus, this serious conflict between the two documents is Crl.As.496- 14 of such a nature, which could not be reconciled altogether, either by the learned ASC for the complainant or by the Additional Prosecutor General. This fact by itself creates sufficient doub ts and on this score , the DNA test report is of no legal worth.

[53] The abductee was killed probably  days after 16.07.2006 while pieces of bones were recovered on 17.08.2006 which were also overrun by the flood water of the channel and mud as well. Accord ing to the well -known medico -legal jurist, MODI such like destruction of entire body of human being, even of teenager is not possible within two months because some of visceras made of tough tissues and full skeleton of human body remain intact.

[54] This opinion of the jurist is based on practical experience in many cases of this nature, instances of which are given by him in the Chapter “STAGES OF PUTREFACTION OR DE -COMPOSITION OF BODY”. I n this case , only scattered pieces of bones were recovered and not full skeleton of human body, which by itself is unbelievable, being against the well established and universally recognized juristic view on the subject.

[55] Thus, the possibility that the body of the person whether dead or alive was torn into pieces by beasts or d ogs etc. Moreover, f rom where the nine additional bones and teeth were arranged by the police and when these were put in the same parcel , is a big question mark for which the prosecution has got no answer to give.

[56] In any case, the recovery of the pieces of bones after one month is entirely doubtful in light of the view expressed by MODI in his book. Same is the view of other renowned Jurists on the subject. 26. The next piece of evidence is the positive result of the DNA test. Whether the report was lega lly admissible , keeping in view the provision of section 510 Cr.P.C. where-under , the report of Crl.As.496- 15 biochemical expert on DNA (a biochemist) is not covered thus , it is open to a serious debate because under the above provision of law, specified experts’ repor ts, excluding the report of above said expert , have been made admissible.

[57] This aspect would be discussed and decided in some other cases elaborately however, at present we are unable to hold the same as an admissible piece of evidence in absence of any sanction of law. 27. In the recent past many scandals in USA, UK and other countries have surfaced where desired DNA test reports were procured by the investigative by contaminating the samples.

[58] Such contamination has also been reported in some cases while the samples remained in the laboratories. Many inquires were held on this issue and stringent law has been made by many States to prevent the contamination of sample s outside and inside the laboratories. Proper procedure has been laid down for securing an d carefully putting into parcel the suspected materials to co -relate with the samples of the parents to establish paternity or maternity.

[59] Similarly, stringent check and procedure has been provided to avoid and prevent cross contamination of the two samples because if both come in contact with each others then, it will give false positive appearance and the expert is thus misled. It has also been discovered that credentials of many experts, claiming posse ssed of higher qualification in this particular field, were found fake and they were thus, removed from service.

[60] The DNA Wikipedia on web is an unrebutted testimony to these facts. 28. In an y case, it is an expert opinion and even if it is admitted into the evidence and relied upon, would in no manner be sufficient to connect the necks of the appellants with the commission of the crime when the bulk of other evidence has been held by us Crl.As.496- 16 unbelievable thus, no reliance can be placed on it to award a capital sentence.

[61] Moreover , to ensure fair -play and transpare ncy, the samples in the laboratories from the parents should have been taken in the presence of some independent authority like a Magistrate and also the recovered samples from the crime scene in the same way to dispel the chances of fabrication of evidenc e through corrupt practices and the transition of the samples to the laboratory should have also been made in a safe and secure manner.

[62] But all these safeguards were kept aside. 29. The plea of the learned ASC for the complainant and the learned Additi onal Prosecutor General, Punjab that because the complainant party was having no enmity to falsely implicate the appellants in such a heinous crime thus, the evidence adduced shall be believed, is entirely misconceived one.

[63] It is a cardinal principle of justice and law that only the intrinsic worth and probative value of the evidence would play a decisive role in determining the guilt or innocence of an accused person. Even evidence of uninterested witness, not inimical to the accused, may be corrupted deli berately while evidence of inimical witness, if found consistent with the other evidence corroborating it , may be relied upon.

[64] Reliance in this regard may be placed on the case of Waqar Zaheer vs. The State (1991 PSC 281) 30. We have found that in the re covery memo with regard to the bones, clothes of the deceased and pair of slippers, subsequent ly addition has been made at a later stage and for that reason alone, the same is liable to be discarded.

[65] In the case of Muhammad Sharif v. The State (1980 SCMR 2 31) interpolation/ over-writings made in the inquest report, w ere considered seriously by this Court and it was held Crl.As.496- 17 that in such a case the Court sho uld be at guard and has to take extra care in making the appraisal of evidence, because once dishonesty in the course of investigation is discovered then Court would always seek strong corroboratory evidence before relying on the other evidence of the prosecution. 31.

[66] As discussed earlier, the entire case of the prosecution is based on circumstantial evidenc e. The principle of law, consistently laid down by this Court is, that different pieces of such evidence have to make one chain, an unbroken one where one end of it touches the dead body and the other the neck of the accused.

[67] In case of any missing link in the chain , the whole chain is broken and no conviction can be recorded in crimes entailing capital punishment. This principle is fully attracted to the facts and circumstances of the present case. 32. It is also a well embedded principle of law and just ice that no one should be con strued into a crime on the basis of presumption in the absence of strong evidence of unimpeachable character and legally admissible one.

[68] Similarly, mere heinous or gruesome nature of crime shall not detract the Court of law in any manner from the due course to judge and make the appraisal of evidence in a laid down manner and to extend the benefit of reasonable doubt to an accused person being indefeasible and inalienable right of an accused.

[69] In getting influence from the nature of the crime and other extraneous consideration might lead the Judges to a patently wrong conclusion. In that event the justice would be casualty. In cases of circumstantial evidence, the Courts are to take extraordinary care and caution before relying on the same.

[70] Circumstantial evidence, even if supported by defective or inadequate Crl.As.496- 18 evidence, cannot be made basis for conviction on a capital charge, More particularly, when there are indications of design in the preparation of a case or introducing a ny piece of fabricated evidence, the Court should always be mindful to take extraordinary precaution s, so that the possibility of it being deliberately misled into false inference and patently wrong conclusion is to be ruled out , therefore hard and fast rules should be applied for carefully and narrowly examining circumstantial evidence in such cases because chances of fabricating such evidence are always there.

[71] To justify the inference of guilt of an accused person, the circumstantial evidence must be of a quality to be incompatible with the innocence of the accused. If such circumstantial evidence is not of that standard and quality , it would be highly dangerous to rely upon the same by awarding capital punishment.

[72] The better and safe course would be not to rel y upon it in securing the ends of justice. 33. In the instant case, both the learned Trial Judge and the learned Division Bench of the High Court in the impugned judgment have not observed, nor have taken care of these guiding and leading principles uni versally accepted and have at random relied on highly cryptic, infirm and incredible evidence, resulting into miscarriage of justice.

[73] For the above mentioned reasons, Crl. Appeal No. filed by the appellants, Mujahid Khan and Arbab Khan is allowed , while the connected appeal (Crl.Appeal No.) filed by the complainant is dismissed. These are the detailed reasons for our short order of the even date, which is reproduced below: - “For detailed reasons to be recorded later on Criminal Appeal No.496 of 2009 is dismissed and Criminal Appeal Crl.As.496- 19 No.497 of 2009 is allowed, the convictions and sentences of both the appellants in Criminal Appeal No.497 of 2009 recorded and upheld by the courts below are set aside and they are acquitted of the charge by extendi ng the benefit of doubt to them.

[74] They shall be released from the jail forthwith if not required to be detained in connection with any other case.” Judge Judge Judge Islamabad, the 15th October , 2015 Nisar/-‘ ‘Approved for reporting’