Case No: Crl.P.L.A.708-L/2018
Case Title: Riasat Ali v. The State, etc
Subject: Life Imprisonment/.
Judge: Mr. Justice Naeem Akhter Afghan
Judgment Date: 10-05-2024
Upload Date: 10-05-2024
Citations: 2024 SCMR 1224
SC Citations: 2024 SCP 167
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.p._708_l_2018.pdf

[1] judgment dated 21.05.2018 passed by the Lahore High Court, Lahore, in Crl. Appeal No. and MR No.315 of 2014 ) Riasat Ali and Fakhar Zaman … … Petitioner s Versus The State and another … … Respondents For the petitioners : Mr. Salman Safdar, ASC For the S tate : Mr. Irfan Zia, Addl. PG Pb. For complainant : Mr.

[2] Muhammad Afzal (in person) Date of hearing : 16.04 .2024 JUDGMENT Naeem Akhtar Afghan, J. While acquitting co -accused Khizar Hayat and Sardar Khan on the charge of abetme nt, petitioners Riasat Ali son of Shan Ali and Fakahar Zaman son of Sardar Khan have been convicted and sentenced as follows by learned Additional Sessions Judge , Phalia , Mandi Bahauddin (the trial Court ) vide judgment dated 13.09.2014 in F IR No. 2 dated 01.01.2012 registered with P olice Station ( PS) Phalia, District Mandi Bahauddin by Muhammad Afzal ( the c omplainant ) for committing murder of Perv ez Iqbal and Asad ullah Khan : “….Fakhar Zaman is guilty of commission of murder of Pervez Iqbal Tarar, therefore, Fakhar Zaman accused is convicted u/s 302(B) PPC and awarded sentence of death penalty of causing murder of Pervez Iqbal.

[3] He be hanged from his neck till death subject to confirmation of Honourable Lahore High Court. He is ordered t o pay compensation u/s 544 -A Cr.P.C. Rs.1,00,000/ - to the legal heirs of deceased and in case of default he would suffer further sentence for six months S.I. He is also convicted u/s  PPC as he formed an un -lawful assembly for committing the occurre nce, he was member of un -lawful assembly, and sentenced for one year S.I.

[4] Crl.P.708 -L/2018 2 38. Fakhar Zaman accused is not guilty of murder of Asadullah, as it was sole act of Riasat Ali accused, and the same was done by Riasat Ali accused solely to save skin of his co -accused. Riasat Ali accused is also found guilty for the commission of murder of Pervez Iqbal and Asadullah convicted u/s 302(B) PPC in two counts for causing murder of Pervez Iqbal and Asadullah Khan awarded death sentence in two counts subject to confirmati on of Honourable Lahore High Court, Lahore and is ordered to pay compensation u/s 544 -A Cr.P.C.

[5] Rs.1,00,000/ - each to the legal heirs and in case of default he would further undergo to six months simple imprisonment. He is also convicted u/s  PPC re ad with Section 302 PPC for forming of unlawful assembly for committing the offence of murder and sentenced for one year R.I ….” 2. The c omplainant preferred Criminal Appeal No.  against acquittal of Khizar Hayat and Sardar Khan and also filed Crimi nal Revision No. before Lahore High Court, Lahore ( the Appellate Court ) for enhancement of the compensation amount imposed upon the convicts but same were dismissed on 21.05.2018 having been withdrawn by the complainant . 3.

[6] Criminal Appeal No. filed by the convicts Riasat Ali and Fakhar Zaman and Murder Re ference No. forwarded by the trial Court have been decided by the Appellate Court vide common judgment dated 21.05.2018 whereby appeal of the petitioners wa s dismissed and while maintaining conviction under section 302(b) of the Pakistan Penal Code ( PPC), their sentence was altered from death to imprisonment for life .

[7] The amount of compensation and the punishment in default thereof with benefit of Section 382-B of the Code of Criminal Procedure ( Cr.P.C. ) was maintained . The Murder Reference No. 4 was answered in negative by the Appellate Court. 4. Feeling aggrieved of the conviction and sentence awarded by the Appellate Court , the petitioners have fil ed the instant petition. 5.

[8] During pendency of the instant petition , legal heirs of deceased Pervez Iqbal entered into compromise with both the petitioners. The compromise was sent to the Court of learned Sessions Judge Mandi Bahauddin for verification. A fter receiving report of learned Sessions Judge Mandi Bahauddin verifying the contents of compromise , the instant petition to the extent of offence in respect of murder of the deceased Pervez Iqbal Crl.P.708 -L/2018 3 was converted into appeal by this Court vide order dated 27.10.2023 .

[9] The same was allowed . Both the petitioners were acquitted of the charge for committing murder of the deceased Pervez Iqbal and they were ordered to be released if not required in an y other case. 6. In the above referred order dated 27.10.2023 , it was held by this Court that since the petitioner Ri asat Ali has also been held responsible f or comm itting murder of Asadu llah Khan and compromise has not been effected by the legal heirs of deceased Asadu llah Khan with him , therefore the instant petition to the exten t of petitioner Riasat Ali for committing murder of deceased Asadullah Khan shall remain intact.

[10] T he office was directed to fix the instant petition for hearing after four weeks. 7. While referring to the evidence available on record , learned counsel for the petitioner Riasat Ali contended that the complainant Muhammad Afzal (PW -14) and Sarfraz Khan (PW-15), who claim to be the eye witnesses of the occurrence , were in fact not present alongwith the deceased at the time of occurrence and being relative s of deceased Perv ez Iqbal , they were planted as eye witnesses during investigation ; the circumstantial evidence as well does not connect the petitioner Riasat Ali with murder of deceased Asadullah Khan ; the prosecution has failed to prove the charge against the petitioner Riasat Ali for committing murder of deceased Asadullah Khan. 8.

[11] Learned counsel for the complainant duly assisted by son of deceased Pervez Iqbal stated that the legal heirs of deceased Perv ez Iqbal are not interested to further pursue the matter and they are also not opposing the instant petition to the extent of petitioner Riasat Ali for committing murder of deceased Asadullah Khan. 9.

[12] Learned Addl. Prosecutor General Punjab (APG) appear ing on behalf of the State contended that the prosecution through ocular as well as circumstantial evidence has proved the charge against the petitioner Riasat Ali for committing murder of deceased Asadullah Khan. 10. After hearing learned counsel for the pet itioner, learned counsel for the complainant and learned APG, we have perused the available record.

[13] According to the version of PW .14 and PW.15, on 01.01.2012 at about 4:45 pm. they alongwith deceased Perv ez Iqbal and Muhammad Crl.P.708 -L/2018 4 Nawaz (not produced by the prosecution at the trial ) came out in the street from Haveli of deceased Perv ez Iqbal and were going to see horses of deceased Pervez Iqbal in his stable but they were fired upon in the street by accused Tariq (deceased) , petitioner Riasat Ali , accused Fakhar Abbas (acquitted by this Court due to acceptance of compromise ) and two unknown accused who had come on two Motorcycles ; the fire shot s hit deceased Perv ez Iqbal on different parts of his body; they stepped forward to apprehend the accused ; meanwhil e Asadullah Khan came out of his house and he grappled accused Tariq while the petitioner Riasat Ali fired upon him which hit on left side of his back due to which he fell down ; all the accused fled while making firing. 11.

[14] The site map (Ex.PU) produced by the prosecution at the trial does not mention the point/place where the stable of deceased Perv ez Iqbal was situated nor it mention s the distance between the Haveli of deceased Perv ez Iqbal and his stable . 12. According to PW.14 and PW.15 they proceeded from the Haveli of deceased Pervez Iqbal to see horse s in his stable but the site map does not mention about the Haveli of deceased Perv ez Iqbal .

[15] In the site map Haveli of one Muhammad Anwar has been shown in occupation of deceased Perv ez Iqbal . Neither the prosecution witnesses have stated that deceased Pervez Iqbal was residing in Haveli of Muhammad Anwar nor the prosecution has produced Muhammad Anwar at the trial to prove that deceased Pervez Iqbal was residing in his Haveli and if so, in what capaci ty. 13.

[16] According to the site map and statements of PW.14 and PW.15 , deceased Asadullah Khan had grappled accused Tariq at point ‘D’ (where his dead body was also found lying) while the petitioner Riasat Ali had fired upon deceased Asadullah Khan from point ‘E’ . The distance between points ‘D’ and ‘E’ is shown as one karam i.e. 5.5 feet.

[17] The postmortem report of deceased Asadullah Khan reveal s that he had received one fire shot on the back of his chest near lower end of his left scapula with a lacerated entrance wound (2.2 cm) having inverted margins surrounded by blackened and burnt area with no exit wound . Crl.P.708 -L/2018 5 PW.14 and PW.15 have failed to explain as to how deceased Asadullah Khan received firearm injury on the back of his chest near lower end of his left scapula if he had grappled the accused Tariq at point ‘D’ while coming out from his house and being fired upon from point ‘E’ from a distance of 5.5 feet. 14.

[18] The postmortem report of deceased Asadullah Khan mentions about blacken ed and burnt area of his entrance wound near lower end of his scapula . The distance from which the deceased Asadullah Khan was fired upon was 5.5 feet. According to Modi’s Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology1 blackening is found , if a firearm like shotgun is discharged from a distance of not more than three feet and a revolver or pistol is discharged within about two feet.

[19] Reference in this regard is also made to the cases of ‘Mir Muhammad v. the State’2, ‘Amin Ali v. the State’3, and ‘ Muhammad Zaman v. the State’4. The prosecution witnesses have failed to furnish any explanation as to if the deceased Asadullah Khan was fired upon by a rifle of 222 bore from a distance of 5.5 feet , how his entrance wound was surrounded by blackened and burnt area. 15.

[20] In the instant case seven crime empties of 222 caliber have been shown recovered from the place of occurrence and one 222 caliber rifle has been shown recovered from the house of the petitioner Riasat Ali on 11th day of the occurrence on his alleged pointation. In the site map it has been mentioned that seven crime empt ies were recovered from point ‘I’ of the place of occurrence but the site map does not mention any point ‘I’.

[21] Admittedly no crime empty was recovered from near point ‘E’ i.e. wherefrom the petition er Riasat Ali had allegedly fired upon deceased Asadullah Khan . In the above regard no explanation has been offered by any prosecution witness including Imdad Hussain SI/IO (PW -16). 16. According to the site map , five accused made firing from points C1, C2, C3, C4 and C5 upon deceased Pervez Iqbal at point 'A' and deceased 1 Modi’s Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology (21 Edition) at page 354 2 1995 SCMR 610 3 2011 SCMR 323 4 2014 SCMR 749 Crl.P.708 -L/2018 6 Asadullah Khan was fired upon at point ‘D’ by the petitioner Riasat Ali from point ‘E’.

[22] In view of the above, the seven crime empties should have been recovered from six different pl aces/points from the place of occurrence but surprisingly the prosecution witnesses have mentioned about recovery of seven cri me empties from one place i.e. point ‘I’ (which has not been mentioned in the site plan ).

[23] The prosecution witnesses including Imdad Hussain SI/IO have not furnished any explanation in the above regard. 17. In his report (Ex.PZ), the firearm expert of Punjab Forensic Science Agency has identified two crime empties i.e. C1 and C2 having been fired from 222 caliber rifle. About 3rd crime empty i.e.

[24] C3, the firearm expert has not given any definite opinion . The remaining three crime empties i.e. C4, C5 and C6 have been held not suitable for comparison by the firearm expert. 18. According to the postmortem report s, the dead body of deceased Pervez Iqbal was brought to the T ehsil Headquarter (THQ) Hospital Phalia on 01.01.2012 at 6:00 pm. by Constable Muhammad Azam and the dead body of dec eased As adullah Khan was brought to the THQ Hospital Phalia on the same date at 8:00 pm by Consta ble Zaheer Ahmed.

[25] Admittedly both the dead bodies were not brought to the hospital by PW.14 and PW.15 who claim to be the eye witnesses. 19. According to PW.14 and PW.15 , the occurrence had taken place on 01.01.2012 at 4:45 pm. As per contents of the postmortem report of deceased Perv ez Iqbal , the time between his injury and death was about half an hour while the time between the injury and death of deceased Asadullah Khan was about one hour.

[26] From the above it reveals that deceased Perv ez Iqbal remained lying injured at the place of occurrence for half an hour and deceased Asadullah Khan remained lying injured at the place of occurrence for one hour but PW.14 and PW.15, claiming to be the eye witnesses , made no effort s to immediately shift both the injured to hospital to save their li fe.

[27] Had PW .14 and PW.15 been present at the place of occurrence with the deceased , being Crl.P.708 -L/2018 7 close relatives of deceased Perv ez Iqbal , they would have immediately taken both the injured to the hospital to save their li fe. The unnatural conduct of PW.14 and PW.15 creates serious doubt about their presence at the place of occurrence with the deceased. 20.

[28] According to the site map, at the time of occurrence when deceased Pervez Iqbal was fired upon at point ‘A’ by five accused persons from points C1, C2, C3, C4 and C5, PW.14 and PW.15 were standing at point ‘B’ at a distance of two karmas i.e. 10.10 feet from point ‘A’ . As per statements of PW.14 and PW.15, they had also stepped forward to appre hend the accused.

[29] PW.14 and PW.15 have not explained as to how they escaped firearm injury despite indiscriminate firing by five accused persons from a close range . The above aspect also creates doubt about presence of P W.14 and PW.15 at the place of occurrence. 21. It is not believable that by killing a person in presence of his close relative s, accused would not attempt to cause any injury to the prosecution witnesses leaving them for evidence to be hanged . 22.

[30] The pros ecution has not produced witness Muhammad Nawaz at the trial who was allegedly accompanying PW.14, PW.15 and deceased Pervez Iqbal at the time of occurrence. Under Article 129(g) of the Qanoon - Shahadat Order , 1984 adverse inference is drawn to the effect t hat had he been produced by the prosecution at the trial , he would not have supported the case of the prosecution. 23.

[31] All the above circumstances have created reasonable doubt in the case of the prosecution benefit of which has not been extended in favour of the petitioner Riasat Ali by the trial Court as well as by the Appellate Court . 24. Reappraisal of the evidence available on record lead us to the conclusion that the prosecution has failed to prove the charge for committing murder of the deceased Asadullah Khan against the petitioner Riasat Ali beyond reasonable doubt .

[32] Crl.P.708 -L/2018 8 25. For the above reasons the instant petition to the extent of the petitioner Riasat Ali for the offence of committing murder of deceased Asadullah Khan is converted into appeal and same is allowed. The impugned judgment dated 21.05.2018 passed by the Lahore High Court to the extent of petitioner Riasat Ali for committing murder of the deceased Asadullah Khan is set aside.

[33] The appellant Riasat Ali is acquitted of the charge under section 302 (b) PPC in FIR No.  2 PS Phalia District Mandi Bahaud din for committing murder of deceased Asadullah Khan and he is ordered to be released forthwith , if not required in any other case. Judge Judge Judge Islamabad: 16.04 .2024 (M.

[34] Saeed /Zohaib Afzal,LC APPROVED FOR REPORTING. Announced in open Court on 10th May, 2024 at Islamabad. Judge