Case No: Crl.P.L.A.149-K/2020
Case Title: Kamran Attaullah & another v. The State
Subject: Bail Before Arrest
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed
Judgment Date: 29-09-2020
Upload Date: 27-01-2021
Citations: 2021 SCMR 449
SC Citations: 2021 SCP 27
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.p._149_k_2020.pdf

[1] judgment dated 26.08.2020 passed by the High Court of Sindh, Karachi in Criminal Bail Application No.S - ) Kamran Attaullah and another …Petitioner(s) Versus The State …Res pondent (s) For the Petitioner(s): Mr. Aamir Mansoob Qureshi, ASC with Kamran Attaullah and Anwar, in person . For the State : Mr.

[2] Sajid Ilyas Bhatti, Addl. Attorney General for Pakistan Qaiser Masood, Addl. Director (Law) FIA Khalid Naseem, Inspector, FIA Karachi Shabbir Chandio, Inspector FIA Karachi For the Complainant(s): Barrister Afzal Hussain, ASC along with Hasan Munawar, in person, assisted by Arslan Binyamin, Advocate Date of hearing: 29.09.2020.

[3] ORDER Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Declined both by the learned Special Judge Central -I Karachi as well as a learned Judge -in- Chamber of the Hig h Court of Sindh, petitioners, Deputy and Assistant Directors in the Federal Investigation Agency, respectively , seek leave of the Court for bail in anticipation to their arrest in a case registered with F.I.A./ACC Karachi ; they are accused to have receive d gratification to the tune of rupees 24 millions from one Sheikh Muhammad Munawar, arrayed as accused in a financial scam to Crl.

[4] P. No.149 -K of 2020 2 subtly defraud Utility Stores Corporation to effect a massive sale transaction through a fake ISO certification . During the inquir y, incriminatory statements of various witnesses were forensically confirmed from the computer CDR and ledgers secured from the custody of co -accused Abdul Qadir Memon , a front man in the transaction ; it was on the basis of this comprehensive probe that th e petitioners braced the impending prosecution . 2.

[5] Heard. Record perused. 3. A detailed parallel story related by the petitioners notwithstanding, nonetheless, they were admittedly at the helm of affairs to call the shot and thus in a position to rescue the complainant from the troubled situation he was trapped ; various pieces of evidence including forensic data, beyond susceptibility of human interference, unmistakably suggest a conduct perfidious to the call of their duty hence , prima facie , cognizable .

[6] It is by now well settled that the accused in a criminal case cannot be granted anticipatory bail to subvert or undermine investigative procedure/process that essentially include arrest in order to bring the statutory exercise to its logical end for effe ctive and meaningful prosecution of the offence through collection of information/evidence consequent upon arrest .

[7] Mala fide, manifestly intriguing upon the intended arrest , is the only justification to suspend or divert the usual course of law, a step mos t extraordinary by all means ; it is not a case in hand. Petition fails. Leave declined. Judge Judge Judge Islamabad, the 29th September , 2020 Not approved for reporting Ghulam Raza /-