Case No: Crl.A.324/2021
Case Title: Shah Zaib and Mst. Shamshad Begum v. The State
Subject: Life Imprisonment/Anti-Terrorism Act
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed
Judgment Date: 17-02-2022
Upload Date: 04-03-2022
Citations: 2022 SCMR 1225
SC Citations: 2022 SCP 88
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.a._324_2021.pdf

[1] judgment dated 24.10.2017 pas sed by the Lahore High Court Lahore in Cr.A. No. 962-J/201 2) Shah Zaib & another (in Cr.A. ) Bilawal (in Cr.A. ) …Appellant (s) Versus The State (in both cases) …Res pondent (s) For the Appellant (s): Barrister Salman Safdar , ASC (in Cr. A. ) Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, ASC (in Cr.

[2] A. 32 ) For the State : Mirza Abid Majeed, Deputy Prosecutor General Punjab For the Complainant: Mr. Akram Gondal, ASC Mr. M. Sharif Janjua, AOR Date of Hearing: 17.02.2022. JUDG MENT Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. :- Bilawal son of Muhammad Boota, Shahzaib son of Muhammad Saeed and Shamshad Begum wife of Muhammad Saleem impugn , through leave of the Court, judgment dated 24.10.2017 by a learned Division Bench of the Lahore High Co urt Lahore whereby guilty verdict returned to them by the learned Judge Anti -Terrorism -II, Gujranwala was upheld albeit with minor modification . 2.

[3] According to the prosecution, set up on the complaint of Irfan Saeed (PW-6), his brother Farhan Saeed (PW-7) left home for his factory in a car on 24.11.2014 , spotted shortly whereafter by the complainant at G.T. Road. Upon query, from amongst the people gathered around, Muhammad Akbar (PW -8) and Adeel Saad (given up) informed the complainant that the appellan ts along with the fourth companion intercepted Farhan Saeed and whisked him towards Lahore in their car .

[4] According to the complainant, he found Criminal Appeal Nos.324 & 325 of 2021 2 a chit lying in the car demanding ransom of rupees one crore . The incident was reported to the police at 1: 45 p.m. pursuant whereto , a police contingent chased the suspect s and engaged them near Poll 170 North on the Motorway.

[5] The accused resisted the contingent and in exchange of fire , one of them Nadeem received fire shots and succumbed to his injuries in the hosp ital. The abductee , in handcuffs, was rescued while the appellants were arrested at the spot. The appellants claimed trial, pursuant whereto , prosecution produced a number of witnesses; of them, Irfan Saeed (PW -6), Farhan Saeed, (PW -7) and Muhammad Akrbar (PW-8) are prominent in the array ; in a unison, the witnesses reiterated the prosecution case with details of events subsequent thereto .

[6] According to the accused, the abductee was teasing women at Morr Emanabad that ignited a situation there , subsequently graduated into a fake police encounter maneuvered by the alleged abductee to settle a score over a monetary dispute with Nadeem deceased . Unimpressed by the plea, the learned trial Judge convicted and sentenced the appellants as under: “U/s 365 -A PPC Imprisonment for life to the each convict and the whole property of the each convict shall also liale to be forfeiture in favour of the State U/s 7(e) ATA Imprisonment for life to the each convict and the whole property of the each convict shall also liale to be forfeiture in favour of the State U/s 337-A(i) PPC Imprisonment for one year RI to each convict alongwith payment of amount of Rs.10000/ - as Daman to the victim U/s 337 -F(i) PPC Imprisonment for one year RI to each convict alongwith payment of amount of Rs.10000/ - as Daman to the victim ” The High Cour t viewed the trial Court’s judgment with approval, however, set aside appellants’ sentences recorded under section s 337 A(i), F(i) PPC on account of composition signified by the injured/ abductee. 3.

[7] Learned cou nsel for the appellants contend that occurrence did not take place in the manner as alleged in the crime report ; that presence of Shamshad Begum with a minor child in her lap suggests a scenario diametrically inconsistent with the hypothesis of abdu ction for ransom . Conceding partial composition , the learned counsel, nonetheless, has strenuously argued that story of a readily available written -note requires a pinch of salt .

[8] Totality of Criminal Appeal Nos.324 & 325 of 2021 3 circumstances relied upon by the prosecution itself unmistakably suggest that the prosecution did not come up with a whole truth. Alternately, he has argued that at the most a case of abduction simpliciter is made out and that he would be more than satisfied with a corresponding modification in the conviction.

[9] The learn ed Law Officer has defended the impugned judgment; he argued that the appellants were arrested red -handed and the abductee , in handcuffs, was rescued shortly after he was taken away on a gunpoint , from the car with one of the appellant s on wheel . 4. Heard. Record perused. 5. Appellants’ red -handed arrest , notwithstanding , a female with a child in their company with handcuffed abductee on board the vehicle , overtaken by the police contingent shortly after registration of a ca se straight at a police stati on, compounded by violent death of one of the captors , nonetheless, does not allow a space to throw out the prosecution case on the basis of ground s agitated at the bar .

[10] However, argument that the prosecution does not possess enough evidence to conclusivel y hypothesize the story of abduction for ransom , is not entirely beside the mark inasmuch as mere reliance upon a hand -written note in the abandoned vehicle , that too, in an encounter , seemingly unanticipated, and events subsequent thereto are the factors more vivid ly spelling out abduction rather simpliciter than the one calculated to fetch ransom .

[11] On appraisal of entire evidence , we are inclined to partially allow the appeals by converting appellants’ conviction from section 365-A to section 365 PPC and sentence them with 7 -years RI with a direction to pay fine in the sum of Rs.50,000/ - each or to undergo six months SI in default thereof ; pre -trial period inclusive .

[12] Convection under section 7(e) of the Anti Terrorism Act , 1997 is set aside with consequenc es concomitant th ereof. Appeals partly allowed. Judge Judge Judge Islamabad, the 17th February , 2022 Azmat /-