Case No: Crl.A.97-L/2016
Case Title: Bashir Ahmed v. The State etc
Subject: Life Imprisonment/Sessions
Judge: MR. JUSTICE QAZI MUHAMMAD AMIN AHMED
Judgment Date: N/A
Upload Date: 15-05-2019
Citations: 2019 SCMR 1417
SC Citations: 2019 SCP 111
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Crl.A._97_L_2016.pdf

[1] judgment dated 27.03.2014 passed by the Lahore High Court, Multan Bench in M.R. No.46 of 2009, Crl.A No. 305 of 200 8, Crl. Rev. No.95 of 2009 & Crl. PSLA No.20 of 2009 ). Bashir Ahma d Mst. Kaneez Fatima …Appellant(s) …Petitioner(s) VERSUS The State, etc. (In both cases) …Respondent(s) For the Appellant(s) : Malik Muhammad Saleem , ASC For the Petitioner(s) : Malik Muhammad Munsif Awan, ASC For the State : Mr.

[2] Mazhar Sher Awan, Additional Prosecutor General Date of Hearing : 07.05.2019 JUDGMENT Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J.- Criminal Appeal by Bashir Ahma d, convict and Criminal Petition for leave to appeal by Mst. Kaneez Fatima , sister of Talib Hussain deceased, arisen out of incident dated 29.5.2003 , with a common thread ar e being decided through this singe judgment. 2.

[3] Prosecution case is structured upon statement of Ghulam Hussain, PW -2. According to him, on the fateful da y his daughter Mst. Kaneez Mai was on her way to fetch grocery items when Naseer Bakhsh accused held her by hair , while his brother Ahmed dealt her club blow; upon receipt of information, the complainant with a pistol rushed to the spot ; Naseer Bakhsh hit him with the club; the pistol fell ed, picked by Naseer Bakhsh accused.

[4] I n the meantime, Talib Hussai n deceased with.12 caliber gun is attracted to the spot. Rehmat Ali accused engaged the deceased with a hatchet blow on his right ear , later fell on the ground when Naseer Bakhsh, Ahmed Khan, Rehmat Ali, Bashir Crl.A.97 -L of 2016 & Crl.P.465 -L of 2014 . 2 Ahmad and Muhammad Zaman caused injuries ; the deceased succumbed to the injuries at the spot .

[5] Manhandling of Mst. Kaneez Mai, PW by Naseer Bakhsh is cited as motive for the crime. Dissatisfied with police inve stigation, the complainant preferred to prosecute the accused through a private complaint ; he blamed that crime report was not faithfully recorded by the investigating officer , otherwise biased in favour of the accused .

[6] Indictment resulted into conviction vide judgment dated 18.12.2008. For homicide, the appellant was sentenced to death besides being held in the community of intention qua the injuries suffered by the witnesses. Naseer Bakhsh, Muhammad Zaman and Ahmed Khan were convicted and sentenced for injuries to the witnesses .

[7] Appeal filed by the convict met with no better fate. A learned div ision bench of the Lahore High Court at Multan vide impugned judgment dated 27.3.2014 upheld the conviction s albeit with alteration of death penalty into imprisonment for life ; sentences awarded to the co -accused were reduced to already undergone by them.

[8] Petition for Special Leave to Appeal by the complainant was dismissed vide the same judgment ; they are in contest once again before us. 3. Well orchestrated narrative by the witnesses that include s the injured, notwithstanding, we have noticed inherent shortcoming s casting their shadow on the prosecution case.

[9] Naseer Bakhsh and Bashir Ahm ad are real brothers, Ahmed Khan accused is former’s son . Muhammad Zaman and Rehmat Ali also hail from the same clan; the entire household is in the array and in this ba ckdrop argument that it is a case of wider net is not entirely beside the mark. Similarly, a pistol and shotgun, admittedly with the deceased and the complainant , lend creden ce to hypothesis of aggression; renunciation of crime report by the complainant go es a long way to tremor the very basis of his case .

[10] Suppression of injuries of an opponent is yet another intriguing circum stance . While the complainant was well within the remit of law to pursue his case through a private complaint , nonetheless, non- exami nation of investigating officer alongside some other witnesses cannot be countenanced without exposing the accused to a grievous prejudice .

[11] Prosecution case is not free from doubt and Crl.A.97 -L of 2016 & Crl.P.465 -L of 2014 . 3 thus it would be unsafe to maintain the conviction. Resultantly, Crimina l Appeal is allowed, the impugned judgment is set aside. The appellant shall be at set at liberty forthwith, if not required in any other case.

[12] As a natural corollary criminal petition for leave to appeal is dismissed. These are the reasons of our short or der of even date which is reproduced as under :- “For reasons to be recorded later, the instant criminal appeal is allowed. The conviction and sentence of the appellant Bashir Ahmad is set aside.

[13] He is acquitted of the charge framed against him. The appell ant is present in person as he is on bail after suspension of his sentence by the learned High Court. Therefore , his sureties are ordered to be discharged. Criminal Petition No.465 -L of 2014 filed for enhancement of sentence of respondents No.2 -5 is dismis sed.” JUDGE JUDGE Lahore , the 07th of May, 2019 Ghulam Raza /* JUDGE