Case No: Crl.P.L.A.1496/2022
Case Title: Shahbaz Akmal v. The State through Prosecutor General Punjab, Lahore and another
Subject: Bail After Arrest
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa
Judgment Date: 05-01-2023
Upload Date: 09-01-2023
Citations: 2023 SCMR 421
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 6
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.p._1496_2022.pdf

[1] order dated 24.10.2022 passed by Lahore High Court, Multan Bench, Multan in Crl.Misc.2448 -B/2022 Shahbaz Akmal …Petitioner Versus The State through Prosecutor General Punjab, Lahore and another …Respondents For the Petitioner : Mr. Shakir Ali, ASC Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR For the State: Ch. M.

[2] Sarwar Sidhu, Addl. PG Pb. For respondent No.2: Mr. Usman Sharif Khosa, ASC Date of Hearing: 05.01.2 023 ORDER Qazi Faez Isa, J . Through this petition for leave to appeal the petitioner seeks bail in a murder case which was re gistered on 9 April 2018 at police station Gulga sht, Multan through FIR No. . 2.

[3] The learned counsel representing the petitioner states that the petitioner was arrested on 17 May 2018 and remain s detained continuously since then and, by referring to clause (b) of the third proviso of section 497 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1898 , submits that the petitioner is now entitled to bail because his trial has not conclude d within a period of two years (as mentioned the cited provision) and the delay is not occasioned by the petitioner .

[4] He further submits that the High Court on 23 June 2020 had directed the Trial Court to conclude the trial preferably within three months, but the trial has not concluded despite the passage of four years and seven months sinc e the petitioner’s arrest and over two years and six mo nths since the said direction was issued . 3.

[5] We had sought a r eport from the Trial C ourt to understand why the trial ha d not concluded and the report submitted by the learned Additional Sessions Judge , Multan , who is conducting the trial , Cr.P. 2 mentions a number of reasons, including strike s by lawyers and the absence of some of the co -accused (who are on bail). 4.

[6] The learned counsel representing the complainant and the learned Additional Prosecutor Genera l, Punjab (‘ APG’) who represent s the S tate submit that the ground of statutory delay, on the basis of which bail is sought , is no longer available to the petitioner because two years of his detention completed on 17 May 2020 where as the petitioner’s bail applic ation (Cr.

[7] Misc. Application No. 4650 -B of 2020) was withdrawn thereafter from the High Court , on 23 June 2020 . Therefore, bail on the said ground of statutory delay cannot be sought in view of the judgment s of this Court in the case s of Nazir Ahmed v The State1 and Muhammad Aslam v The State .2 However, both t he complainant’s learned counsel and the learned APG assure d the Court that no unnecessary adjournment will be sought during the trial. 4.

[8] In the cited case of Nazir Ahmed (a judgment by a three -Member Bench of this Court) it was held that another bail application on the same ground cannot be repeated before the same court. And, if a bail application is withdrawn during the subsistence of a ground on which bail is sought it cannot be taken again if the b ail application was withdrawn.

[9] The said decision was endorsed in the case of Muhammad Aslam (a judgment by a five -Member Bench of this Court) . Therefore, the ground of statutory delay is no longer available to the petitioner and to such extent this petitio n is not maintainable. 5. However, we cannot be unmindful of the fact that the petitioner is suffering through no fault of his own and that the direction of the High Court , to conclu de the trial , has in effect been rendered meaningless .

[10] A detained accused must not be made to suffer because his advocate elects to strike or does so in solidarity with his colleagues . The Pakistan Bar Council has enacted the ‘Canons of Professional Conduct and Etiquette of Advocates’ which stipulates that, ‘ It is duty of the Adv ocates to appear in Court when a matter is called ’3 and ‘ make satisfactory alternative arrangements ’ if he is unable to.

[11] The advocate representing an accused must discharge his duty towards his cl ient. Every relationship functions on the basis of trust, 1 PLD 2014 Supreme Court 241. 2 PLD 2015 S upreme Court 41. 3 Pakistan Legal Practitioners and Bar Council Rules, 1976, rule 166, Gazette of Pakistan, Extraordina ry, 22 May 1976 .

[12] Cr.P. 3 and when trust is broken the relationship flounders and unravels, which also has societal repercussions. 6. The Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (‘Constitution ’) commences by stating that the exercise of authority is a sacred trust . If an advo cate representing a detained accused does not attend court he fails to perform his professional duty and breaks his client ’s trust .

[13] An accused person like any other has the inalienable right to ‘enjoy the protection of law and to be treated in accordance w ith law’4 but if advocates strike and tri als are postponed this constitutional right of the accused is negated. The Constitution also mandates that ‘ no action detrimental to the … liberty ’5 of anyone be taken ‘ except in accordance with law ’ therefore, if t he trial of a detained accused is delayed on account of strike(s) , and subsequently , the accused is acquitted then the additional incarceration suffered by the accused would have been detrimental to his liberty .

[14] Amongst the designated Fundamental Rights of an accused there is also the right to a fair trial and due process6 which rights are premised on proceeding with the trial of a detained accused . 7. Lawyers played a n extraordinary role in ensuring compliance with the Constitution and the rule of law durin g the movement launched by them for the independence of the judiciary and for the restoration of judges who had been unconstitutionally deposed (the Lawyers’ Movement7), which was wholeheartedly supported by civil society.

[15] During this movement some superio r courts came to be presided over by those who took an oath of allegiance to a dictator (in violation of their constitutional oath of office8) or by those who were not appointed in accordance with the Constitution . Therefore, to protect and ensure complian ce with the Constitution for the benefit and protection of the people , strikes were called and courts were boycotted . 8.

[16] However, if an advocate strike s for a lesser or personal reason it would be appropriate to first return the professional fee received fr om the client. An advocate should not strike at the expense of the client. 4 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Article 4(1). 5 Ibid, Article 4(2)(a). 6 Ibid, Article 10A . 7 March 2007 to March 2009. 8 Ibid, Third Schedule.

[17] Cr.P. 4 We also note that at times a case is adjourned because the complaint’s advocate is not in attendance. It is clarified that a court does not have to wait for the complainant’s advoca te to attend court , much less adjourn a case due to his absence, because the State counsel , employed at taxpayers’ expense , is required to prosecute cases. 9.

[18] Therefore, for the reason s mentioned above this petition is not maintainable , and is dismissed . However, the assurance extended by the complainant’s learned counsel and the learned APG, that no unnecessary adjournment will be sought shall be treated as an assurance given to the Trial Court. And, w e direct the learned Judge of the Trial Court to conclud e the petitioner’s trial expeditiously within two months from the date of the receipt of this order .

[19] In case the petitioner’s trial is not concluded within the said period the learned Judge shall submit an explanation to the High Court, through the Registr ar, mentioning the reasons thereof. It is also clarified that the Trial Court is not obliged to adjourn the case of the petitioner if any co-accused or the complainant’s advocate is absent.

[20] However, i f the petitioner’s advocate is absent the Court may adjo urn the case after informing the petitioner that due to his advocate’s absence the case is being adjourn ed, and if appropriate t he Trial Court may appoint another advocate to represent the accused. 10. Copy of th is order to be sent to the learned Judge of the Trial Court for information and compliance .

[21] Copies should also be sent to all provincial b ar council s and the Pakistan Bar Council, who undoubtedly would remind advocates of their professional duties and would ensure that the prestige of the legal pro fession is not undermined by advocates who strike for a lesser cause than to protect and defend the Constitution in the public interest .