Case No: Crl.P.L.A.33/2021
Case Title: Muhammad Nadeem v. Muhammad Khurram Iqbal & another
Subject: Cancellation of Bail
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed
Judgment Date: 17-02-2022
Upload Date: 09-03-2022
Citations: 2022 SCMR 1168
SC Citations: 2022 SCP 91
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.p._33_2021.pdf

[1] judgment dated 11.01.2021 passed b y the Lahore High Court Bahawalpur Bench Bahawalpur in Cr. Misc. No.4127 -B/2020 ) Muhammad Nadeem …Petitioner (s) Versus Muhammad Khurram Iqbal and another …Res pondent (s) For the Petitioner (s): Nemo For Respondent No.1 : Ch. Hafeez Ullah Yaqub , ASC with respondent.

[2] Mr. M. Sharif Janjua, AOR For the State: Mirza Abid Majeed, Deputy Prosecutor General Punjab Date of Hearing: 17.02.2022. ORDER Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. :- Impugned herein is order dated 11.01.2021 whereby a learned Judg e-in-Chamber of the Lahore High Court at Bahawalpur Bench Bahawalpur admitted Khurram Latif respondent to bail in anticipation to his arrest in a criminal case under section s 3, 4 of the Punjab Prohibition Money Lending Act, 2007 , registered with Police St ation City Sadiqabad on the complaint of Muhammad Nadeem petitioner .

[3] According to the petitioner , in the course of a business transaction, he borrowed a sum of Rs.150,000/ - to be repaid through monthly installment s of Rs.6000/ - each, a terminal vicious circle that continued to burden him despite payment of Rs.500,000/ -; as the petitioner exorbitantly raised the interest rate and also coerced him to issue bank cheque s from his account , a sword of damocles over his head , trapped with no option, he finally laid information with the police and it is in this backdrop that Criminal Petition No. 33 of 2021 2 petitioner’s first attempt before a learned Additional Sessions Judge at Sadiqabad failed , however, upon his approach to the High Court he was granted judicial protection vide impugned order d ated 11.01.2021 . 2.

[4] Heard. Record perused. 3. What weighed with the learned Judge -in-Chamber to favourably exercise his extraordinary equitable jurisdiction in respondent’s favour , for the convenience of reference is reproduced below: - “After hearing th e learned counsel for the parties and having gone through the record, it reveals that although the petitioner is named in the FIR with the above said accusation of committing violation of provision of the Act ibid, but at the same time I observed that duri ng the course of investigation, an arbitration /Panchayat was convened between the parties and arbitration deed was executed, in which it is categorically written that the present petitioner is not involved in any money lending and an amount of Rs.44,700/ - is still outstanding against Muhammad Nadeem towards the present petitioner.

[5] In this regard, the complainant himself has sworn an affidavit, copy of the same is annexed with this petition, in which he has reiterated that the petitioner is owner of Al-Medina Traders and he has no concern with the money lending and he further undertook to pay Rs.44700/ - which were still outstanding against him.

[6] When this situation was put to the Investigating officer, present in court, he frankly conceded that an arbitratio n deed has been written between the parties.” The reasoning by itself unmistakably confirm s subsistence of a dispute raging between the parties over payment of some outstanding amount .

[7] Upon a direction issued by this Court, District Police Officer Rahim Y ar Khan confirmed that the impugned affidavit , relied upon by the High Court was secured by the respondent, through means stained with duress and coercion, an act by itself constituting an offence under the law ; at worst , hardly furnishing a justification to extend a relief rooted into equity that too by suspending usual course of law, inevitably arrest in a cognizable criminal case .

[8] It is by now well settled that protection of pre -arrest bail is essentially a judicial protection to protect the innocent, be ing Criminal Petition No. 33 of 2021 3 targeted through abuse of process of law for motives, oblique and sinister ; it is neither a substitute for post arrest bail nor a treatment to be extended in every run of the mill criminal case .

[9] It is an option that warrants caution in its exercise, se emingly ignored by the High Court. Criminal Petition is converted into appeal and allowed; pre-arrest bail granted to the respondent is cancelled. Judge Judge Judge Islamabad, the 17th February , 2022 Azmat /-