Case No: Crl.P.L.A.1079-L/2020
Case Title: Akash Masih v. The State, etc
Subject: Bail Before Arrest
Judge: Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah
Judgment Date: 30-07-2021
Upload Date: 02-08-2021
Citations: PLD 2021 SC 822
SC Citations: 2021 SCP 231
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.p._1079_l_of_2020.pdf

[1] order dated 11.09.2020 passed by the Lahore High Court, Lahore in Crl. Misc. No.23063 -B/2020) Akash Masih . ...….Petitioner(s) Versus The State, etc. …….Respondent (s) For the petitioner(s): Mst. Tasneem Amin, AOR. For the State: Rana Abdul Majeed, Addl. P.G. Date of hearing: 30.07.2021 ORDER Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. - This matter pertains to pre-arrest bail of the petitioner , but insipte of repeated calls the petitioner has not tendered appearance.

[2] Ms. Tasneem Ameen, Advocate on Record (“AOR”) submits that she has no information regarding the where about s of the petitioner and submits that learned ASC for the petitioner has since passed away. Upon our asking , the learned AOR informed us that she does not even have the contact details of the petitioner. 2.

[3] It is important to highlight that the role of an AOR i s pivotal in the dispensation of justice in this Court . Under Rule 6 of Order IV of the Suprem e Court Rules, 1980 (“Rules”) , no advocate other than an AOR can appear or plead in any ma tter unless he is instructed by an AOR. Under Rule 15 of Order IV of the Rules , no advocate other than an AOR is entitled to act for a party in any proceedings in the Court.

[4] Further, e very AOR before acting on behalf of any person or party is to file in the Registry a power of attorney in the mann er prescrib ed in Form 5 of the S ixth Schedule to the Rules.1 Under the terms of the prescribed power of attorney an AOR is, inter alia , authorized to appear and defend his or her client ; to file and take back documents; to accept the processes of the Court; to appoin t and instruct counsel; to represent his client in the matter and to do all things incidental to such acting for the 1 Order IV Rule 22 Crl.P No. 1079 -L/2020 2 client.

[5] Under Rule 25 of Order IV of the Rules , every AOR in the case is personally liable to the Court for due payment of all fees and cha rges payable to the Court. These provisions unambiguously show the fundamental role played by an AOR in the life of a case filed before this Court. However, much to our regret, it is noticed in the instant case that the learned AOR has not been able to per form her responsibilities as envisaged under the Rules.

[6] In the present case the AOR has no knowledge of the where abouts of the petitioner or even has his contact details to verify the reason for his absence . It is underlined that the case and court managem ent system at the Supreme Court is hugely dependent on the quality of professional services rendered by the learned AOR.

[7] Failure of the learned AOR to carry out her obligations as envisaged under the Rules or the terms of her Power of Attorney unnecessarily delays the matter and seriously hampers the reduction of pendency of cases before this Court. The Rules also point towards the removal of the name of the AOR from the Rolls for professional misconduct or for being unfit to be enrolled.

[8] Howeve r, for now, we are confident that the learned AOR has been sufficiently cautioned and we are sanguine that the learned AOR will perform her duties more onerously , vigilantly and responsibly in accordance with the Rules, from now on. 3. Since the petit ioner is not present in Court in this pre - arrest bail matter, the learned AOR is not aware of his whereabouts, the petitioner has made no effort to contact the learned AOR, thus, in this background, we are of the view that this petition cannot proceed furt her in terms of section 498 -A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 read with the second proviso to Rule 8 of the Order 23 o f the Suprem e Court Rules, 1980 .

[9] Leave is therefore refused and this petition is dismissed. Lahore , 30th July, 2021 . Approved for reporting Iqbal Judge Judge