Case No: Crl.A.52-P/2009
Case Title: State through Advocate General KP Peshawar v. Hassan Jalil & others
Subject: Against Acquittal/Sessions
Judge: MR. JUSTICE QAZI MUHAMMAD AMIN AHMED
Judgment Date: N/A
Upload Date: 15-05-2019
Citations: 2019 SCMR 1154
SC Citations: 2019 SCP 109
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Crl.A._52_P_2009.pdf

[1] judgment dated 28.1.2004 of the Peshawar High Court, Peshawar passed in Cr. A. No.) State thr . Advocate General , KP, Peshawar …Appellant(s) VERSUS Hassan Jalil & others …Respondent(s) For the Appellant(s) : Mr. Qasim Wadud, Additional Advocate General, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa For the Respondent(s) : N.R.

[2] Date of Hearing : 29.04.2019 Judgment Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. Through leave of the Court, impugned herein is the judgment dated 28.1.2004 by a learned Judge -in-Chambers of the Peshawar High Court, whereby finding of guilt, in a case of homicide by the learned Sessions Judge, Hangu has been set aside.

[3] This is in the backdrop of incident dated 30.3.1999, within the remit of Police Station Hangu, District Kohat, reported by Hassa n Jalil’s mother -in-law, Noor Seema PW, who surprised the former while fleeing from the home, leaving behind his wife Mst. Perveen Bibi in a pool of blood along side the minors with multiple injuries; she pointed her finger upon the respondent.

[4] Upon indictment the respondent claim ed trial that culminated in conviction with sentences consequent thereupon vide judgment dated 22.3.2003, subsequently reversed in appeal. 2. Learned Additional Advocate General, Khyber Pakhtoonkhwa has impugned the vires of impugned judgment of the learned High Court on th e ground that i n the face of overwhelming evidence there was no occasion for respondent’s Criminal Appeal No.52 -P/2009 2 acquittal that too in the wake of his long standing absconsion as well as abysmal failure to explain as to what befell upon the household; occurrence being a da y light affair there was no space to entertain any hypothesis of mistaken identity or given the relationship , substitution, it is next argued by the learned law officer.

[5] He has pointed out death of the children in consequence of injures suffered by them. 3. Respondent’s relationship with the deceased as well as the minors is not in dispute and so is homicidal death of his better half and receipt of injuries by the children, under the same roof ; nonetheless in the absence of positive proof he cannot be held guilty for the crime either on the basis of suspicion, moral satisfaction or his failure to explain circumstances, leading to the calamity.

[6] Prosecution’s silence to explain as to what possibly prompted the respondent to wipe out his own family is also intriguing, though the complainant in the witness box, obliquely referred to a quarrel between the spouses , however , suggesting cordial relations in the same breath. Arrival of Noor Sima, PW at venue exactly at a point of time when the respondent allegedly di d away with the deceased, in itself is a circumstance that reflects on the very genesis of the prosecution case.

[7] On an overall analysis of the prosecution evidence, the learned High Court found the prosecution case fraught from doubts, an analysis that can not be viewed as unconscionable or imprudent, being well within the realm of possibility, calling for interference. Appeal is dismissed. JUDGE JUDGE Islamabad, the 29th of April, 2019 Ghulam Raza/* JUDGE