Case No: Crl.P.L.A.958/2020
Case Title: Muhammad Irfan v. The State thr. Special Prosecutor, A.N.F. and another
Subject: Bail After Arrest
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed
Judgment Date: 15-10-2020
Upload Date: 17-10-2020
Citations: 2020 SCMR 2017
SC Citations: 2020 SCP 227
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._958_2020.pdf

[1] order dated 14.4.2020 passed by the Peshawar High Court Peshawar in Crl. MBA N o.106 -D/2020) Muhammad Irfan …Petitioner(s) Versus The State & another …Res pondent (s) For the Petitioner(s): Ch. Muhammad Ayub Arbab Gujar, ASC For the State : Raja Inaam Ameen Minhas, Ch. Ehtisham ul Haq, Special Prosecutors, ANF For the co-accused : Khawaja Azhar Rasheed, ASC with Dilshad Khan , co-accused.

[2] Date of hearing: 15.10.2020. ORDER Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - On a tip off, Muhammad Irfan , petitioner, accompanied by Dilshad Khan, co-accused , was intercepted by a con tingent of Anti Narcotic Force , Dera Ismail Khan at 1 3:00 hours on 17.1.2020 ; upon search, a substantial cache of cannabis , weighing 12 kilograms , stealthily concealed underneath the rear seat of the vehicle, driven by them, was recovered, a portion whereo f, was wrapped around the belly of Dilshad Khan co -accused .

[3] The contraband as well as the vehicle bearing Registration No.BHH -686/S indh were secured vide inventories of even date. After failure with the learned Special Judge, Muhammad Irfan petitioner app roached the High Court through Crl. MB No.57 -D/2020 for his release on bail, declined by a learned Judge -in-Chamber on 27.2.2020 .

[4] The same learned Judge, however, granted bail to Dilshad Khan, co -accused in Crl. MBA No.90 -D/2020 on 25.3.2020 , on the basis whereof , the present petitioner approached the High Court for his release on bail on the principle of requirement of consistency, Criminal Petition No. 985 of 2020 2 dismissed by another learned Judge -in-Chamber vide order dated 14.4.2020 , impugned before this Court through the titled petiti on.

[5] Prima facie found by us to have been released on bail for reasons unsustainable in law, Dilshad Khan, co -accused, was sent for vide order dated 3.9.2020 to show cause as to why bail granted to him by the High Court may not be cancelled . Khawaja Azhar Rasheed, ASC has defended grant of bail to Dilshad Khan co -accused ; citing various judgments of this Court, he contends that once bail is granted , exceptionally strong grounds , pari materia with those applicable to interference with acquittal , are require d to rescind the concession ; he adds that the concession was never abused and in the wake of commencement of trial, cancellation of bail would be a measure far from being expedient.

[6] The Court has traditionally exercised restraint to recall freedom, conclud ed the learned counsel. Ch. Muhammad Ayub Gujjar, ASC, learned counsel for Muhammad Irfan petitioner has prayed for equal treatment ; according to him, the petitioner being identically placed with his co -accused is squarely entitled to avail the same conce ssion . “Sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander ”, asserted the learned counsel. 2.

[7] Heard. Record perused. 3. A different regime, somewhat narrowly jacketed, is applied to consider the propriety/desirability of cancellation of bail , once granted by a competent tribunal , on the assumption that apprehended fallout of interim freedom und er an interlocutory arrangement, even though granted under error, can be indemnified through final adjudication , however, the benign concept of condonation cannot be applied, without being unconscionable in cases structured upon findings inherently anomalous, flawed or mutually destructive and inconsistent , more so in categor y of offences with restrictions statutorily heavier on offender’s release on bail.

[8] In the present case, the learned Judge shortly before releasing Dilshad Khan on bail i.e. 27.2.2020, did not feel persuaded to allow bail to Muhammad Irfan petitioner on the following ground s: “It appears from the record available on file that huge quantity of Charas wa s recovered on pointation of the accused/petitioner from the motorcar driven by him.

[9] The samples of recovered contraband were sent to the FSL as per requirement of law and the report of Chemical Examiner is in positive. The offence with which the Criminal Petition No. 985 of 2020 3 accused/p etitioner has been charged falls within restrictive clause of Section 497 Cr.P.C. However, the learned Judge proceeded to grant bail to Dilshad Khan co-accused even in the absence of his counsel on 25.3.2020 on the basis of argument s, never addressed at the bar and for reasons diametrically incompatible recorded in the earlier order .

[10] Reference to the outbreak of Covid -19 Contagion is also beside the mark in view of decision dated 7-4-2020 by this Court whereby blanket bails granted by all the High Courts on the ground of prevalence of Pandemic were cancelled by this Court . Grant of bail is not an irrevocable charter of freedom ; in appropriate cases , while exercising charitable restraint , nonetheless, it is a judicial responsibility to rectify situations leading towards embarrassing anomalies , as is likely to come about in the present case .

[11] Grant of bail to Dilshad Khan co -accused cannot be countenanced while withholding the concession to the co -accused , equally disentitled to be released on bail in view o f the merit s of the case that manifest interception of both the accused in a vehicle carrying a substantial quantity of the contraband, craftily concealed and recovered on disclosure s, by both of them , from underneath the seat inside the cabin as well as w rapped around the body , bringing their case within the ‘Prohibition’ provided under section 51 of the Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997 .

[12] Failure by the police contingent to register the case under the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Control of Narcotic Substance s Act, 2019 , an error open to rectification, does not by itself mitigate the enormity of the crime nor possibly furnish a ground for their release on bail. Overwhelming evidence, prima facie pointed , equally upon both the accused, admits no space to conte mplate any distinction and as such does not allow to countenance the error, therefore , bail granted to Dilshad Khan vide order dated 25.3.2020 is cancelled ; he shall be taken into custody to face indictment.

[13] Concomitantly, Criminal Petition No.958 of 2020 filed by Muhammad Irfan fails . Leave declined. Judge Judge Islamabad, the 15th October , 2020 Not approved for reporting Azmat /-