Case No: Crl.P.L.A.143-K/2020
Case Title: Faheemullah v. The State
Subject: Sentence/Enhancement of (in ATA/STA Cases)
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed
Judgment Date: 06-09-2021
Upload Date: 10-09-2021
Citations: 2021 SCMR 1795
SC Citations: 2021 SCP 265
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.p._143_k_2020.pdf

[1] judgment dated 07.07.2020 passed by the High Court of Sindh at Karachi in Cr. A. No.615 of 20 19) Faheemullah …Petitioner (s) Versus The State …Res pondent (s) For the Petitioner (s): Syed Shau -un-Nabi, ASC Ms. Abida Parveen Channar, AOR For the State : Mr. Hussain Bux, Addl. Prosecuto r General Sindh Date of hearing: 06.09.2021 ORDER Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J.- Surprised with 5080 grams of cannabis by a contingent of Police Station Pirabad, the petitioner was sent to Court of Session (West) Karachi ; upon indictment, he claimed t rial that resulted into his conviction under section 9(c) of the Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997 ; he was sentenced to 7 -years 6 -months with a direction to pay fine vide judgment dated 30.8.2019, upheld by a Division Bench of the High Court of Sind h vide impugned judgment dated 7.7.2020 , vires whereof, are being assailed on the grounds that the High Court as well as the Court of Session, concurrently ran into error by placing implicit reliance on the prosecution ’s evidence, inherently flawed and tainted, maliciously produced to secure an unjustified conviction; the bottom line is that a false case was cooked up , through abuse of process of law , to hush up an unauthorized raid on petitioner’s house , during the course whereof, cash, gold ornaments as w ell as other valuables were taken away by a police mobile, an incident that according to the learned counsel was witnessed by the neighbourhood.

[2] The learned Law Officer has faithfully defended the impugned judgment being based upon confidence inspiring evi dence . 2. Heard. Record perused. Criminal Petition No. 143-K/2020 2 3. Prosecution case is consistent and straightforward . The petitioner was apprehended during a routine patrol and his arrest along with contraband were incorporated in the daily diary, entry whereof , is placed on record a s Exh.3/A; site plan and inspection note also coincide with the details, elaborated in the crime report .

[3] These are also consistent with the investigative details. There is nothing on the record that could even obliquely support the plea belatedly taken by the petitioner and, thus, preponderance of prosecution evidence comprising safe custody of contraband , transmission of sample to the office of chemical examiner with a positive report supported by a unison account furnished by the official witnesses remain ed unscathed during an inconsequently cross -examination .

[4] Learned trial Court as well as the High Court concurrently found the prosecution evidence sufficient to successfully constitute “proof beyond doubt ”; we on our own independent analysis, in the absenc e of any material to support the hypothesis canvassed at the bar , have not been able to persuade ourselves to take a different view.

[5] Impugned judgment being well within remit of law and inconsonance with the principle of safe administration of criminal justice calls for no interference. Petition fails. Leave declined. Judge Judge Karachi , the 6th September , 2021 Not approved for reporting Azmat /-