Case No: Crl.P.L.A.1485-L/2019
Case Title: Muhammad Jahangir Khan, etc v. The State, etc
Subject: Bail Before Arrest
Judge: Mr. Justice Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi
Judgment Date: 07-07-2020
Upload Date: 13-07-2020
Citations: 2020 SCMR 1270
SC Citations: 2020 SCP 142
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.p._1485_l_2019.pdf

[1] order authored by my learned brother Mr. Justice Manzoor Ahmad Malik concurred by Mr. Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan. With utmost respect, I disagree with the reasonings hence, render my own findings. SAYYED MAZAHAR ALI AKBAR NAQVI, J.: - Petitioners have assailed jurisdiction of this Court under Article 185(3) of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 seeking leave to appeal against the order of Single Bench of Lahore High Court (Multan Bench) dated 30.10.2019 by which ad -interim bail granted vide order dated 14.10.2019 was recalled with a prayer to grant anticipatory bail to the petitioners in the interest of safe administration of criminal justice. 2.

[2] As per contents of the crime report bearing FIR No. d ated 27.05.2019, offences u/s 324, 452, 354, 148, 149 PPC registered with police station Sahuka, Burewala, it is alleged that 18 accused duly mentioned while 12 unknown variously armed came to the house of complainant. They hurled threats of dire-consequen ces and thereafter resorted to indiscriminate firing.

[3] It is further alleged that they trespassed into the house of complainant. Mehmood Khan accused raised "lalkara" upon which Athar Farooq fired with pistol .30 bore hitting Muhammad Mumtaz on right arm wh ereas fire shot made by Mehmood Khan had hit on right leg of a buffalo. Women folk belonging to complainant , Manzooran Bibi, Rashidan Bibi, Sonia Bibi and Khalida Bibi attracted to spot to rescue, they were given beating as a consequence they suffered inju ries, clothes worn by them were also alleged to have been torn which made them naked.

[4] Thereafter all Crl. Petition No. 1485 -L of 2019 6 the accused again indulged in aerial firing which had hit boundary walls and houses of the complainant party. The motive behind the occurrence is dispute o ver agricultural land. 3. The crux of the arguments advanced by learned counsel for the petitioners is that there is delay of 12 hours in lodging FIR for which no plausible explanation has been rendered.

[5] Contends that the story advanced by the prosecution is not convincing as it does not appeal to reason , rather it has been aggravated by the prosecution. A llegation that 30 persons in furtherance of their common intention had attacked, however, only one person sustained single fire shot on non -vital part seems to be absurd, said inj ury was ultimately dec lared under section 337F(iii) PPC, which entail maximum punishment for 3 years as per statue , whereas the rest of the PWs sustained simple injures which are bailable in nature.

[6] It is argued that the alle gation of entering into the house of complainant was found false during the course of investigat ion and as such Sec. 452 PPC was deleted , which has not been challenged. It is further apprised that the accused party called in question the medico -legal repor t of firearm injury being a fabricated document.

[7] A petition in this regard was filed which was allowed. Consequently medical board was constituted in pursuance of the o rder of Judici al Magistrate dated 14.06.2019. The Medical Board summoned injured PW but h e escaped appearance on 08.07.2019, 27.07.2019 and 01.08.2019 . In this scenario possibility of fabrication as alleged by the accused party cannot be ruled out.

[8] The question of vicarious liability in the given circumstances has lost its sting too; hence, sa me Crl. Petition No. 1485 -L of 2019 7 would be resolved after recording of evidence before the learned trial court. 4. On the other hand, learned Additional Advocate General resisted the grant of pre -arrest bail on the ground that 20 empties were recovered and as such recovery of weapon has to be affected .

[9] It is a case of common object; therefore, each of them is vicariously liable for the act of others and the petitioners cannot be granted extra -ordinary relief, hence, prayed for its rejection. 5. This Court is conscious of the fact that concept of pre - arrest bail is an extra -ordinary relief, which is limited to rare cases based upon trumped -up charges rather it has to be extended sparingly .

[10] To avail such relief, it is obligatory to establish that the prosecution has been launched, which is based upon malafides , ulterior motives and if it is materialized, it would certainly cause irreparable loss to his reputation. The practice to grant ad -interim bail is extension of such a remedy to act as a shield to protect innocent person facing highh andedness of individuals or authority against frivolous litigation.

[11] Literally speaking t he term ad -interim is a misnomer as it has fallen in practice. It is worth mentioning that ad-interim is not mentioned in any provision rather this idea has been derive d from the Order XXXIX Rules 1& 2 of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (“ Code of 1908 ).The rational e to grant ad -interim bail is though synonymous to passing a prohibitory injunction, however, the concept of ad -interim bail is more precious as compare to prohibitory injunction.

[12] In the former, liberty of the person is involved whereas in the latter, only propriety rights are in question. The status of the accused becomes “custodia legis” during the period Crl. Petition No. 1485 -L of 2019 8 when ad -interim bail is granted till its final adju dication subject to furnishing of sureties to the satisfaction of the Court.

[13] Reliance is placed upon judgment of Full Bench reported as Shabbir Ahmad v. The State ( PLD 1981 Lahore 599 ). The provision of Sec.497(2) Cr.P.C confers powers upon the Court to g rant bail during investigation, enquiry or trial subject to an opinion is formed by the Court that material placed before it is not sufficient to establish guilt and it still requires further inquiry into his guilt whereas Section 498 Cr.P.C deals with two situations: - i) The fixation of the amount or bond according to the circumstances ; ii) Conferment of power s to grant bail to a person who is not in custody; Although the provision of Section 498 Cr.P.C is neither ancillary nor subsid iary to Section 497 Cr.P.C but is an independent Section , however, bare reading of language of sub -section (2) of Section 497 Cr.P.C provide consideration s for grant of bail by virtue of section 497(2) Cr.P.C it practically merged section  Cr.P.C. into one aspect qua c oncept of pre -arrest bail persuading it to act conjointly in all fairness.

[14] The practice for grant of extra -ordinary relief has passes through transitory period with divergent interpretation qua its scope since its inception, however, law is not static rather it is growing day by day. This Court while handing down a salutary judgment titled as "Meeran Bux vs. The State and another" ( PLD 1989 Supreme Court 347 ) enunciated the concept of pre -arrest bail which was more innovative, liberal, crafted in consonance with the intent of legislature, hence, it has conceptually widened its scope in its entirety, elaborating its concept in the spirit Crl.

[15] Petition No. 1485 -L of 2019 9 of section  Cr.P.C. It was reiterated in another judgment of this Court titled as “Syed Muhammad Firdaus and o thers v. The State ( 2005 SCMR 784 ). This Court virtually introduced a broad ened mechanism of interpretation to adjudge the element of malafide or malice at the touch stone of merits of the case.

[16] In the said case, mentioned above, the accused who was ascri bed the injury to the deceased on leg (simple in nature) was granted pre- arrest bail by Sessions Judge which was recalled by learn ed High Court while exercising suo -motu revisional jurisdiction, however, the order of learned Sessions Judge was restored by this Court while elaborating the principle in the above said terms . 6.

[17] Keeping in view the facts and circumstances narrated above, it has made it abundantly clear that while granting pre-arrest bail, Court can consider the merits of the case in addition to element of malafides/ulterior motives which has to be adjudged in the light of law laid down by this Court in the case law stated supra .

[18] As a consequence, courts of law are under bounded duty to entertain broader interpretation of “law of ba il” while interpreting material placed before it in more liberal manner to arrive at a conclusion which is badly required due to apparent downfall in the standard of investigation. Otherwise l iberty of a person is a precious right which has been guaranteed under the constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973.

[19] To abridge or curtail the liberty merely on the ground of being involved in a criminal case without adjudging it on merits would certainly encroached upon the right against free life. This right should not be infringed , rather it has to be protected by Crl. Petition No. 1485 -L of 2019 10 the act of Court otherwise it may frustrate the concept of safe administration of criminal justice. 7.

[20] The accumulative effect of the whole discussion and while seeking guidance from the above referred case law, this Court is of considered opinion that the petitioners have made out a case for grant of extraordinary relief of pre -arrest bail , hence are squarely entitled for the same. As a consequence this petition is converted into app eal and allowed accordingly.