Case No: H.R.C.13316-P/2018
Case Title: In the matter regarding colossal losses incurred by Pakistan Railways
Subject: U/A 184(3)
Judge: Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed
Judgment Date: 09-07-2020
Upload Date: 09-07-2020
Citations: 2020 SCMR 1216
SC Citations: 2020 SCP 141
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/h.r.c._13316_p_2018.pdf

[1] ORDER A report has been submitted by the Secretary/Chairman, Ministry of Railways, Islamabad , wherein , referen ce has been made to the up-gradation of Railways trough ML-I, under the China Pakistan Economic Corridor ( CPEC ) and also to the Karachi Circular Railway (KCR). HRC No.13316 -P of 2018 2 2.

[2] As regards ML -I, it is informed that PC -I is now pending with ECNIC for approval and as soo n as the said approval is received , work will be started . We expect that ECNIC shall consider and have PC-I approved , as per rule s within a period of one month. 3. As regards KCR , it has been stated that considerable work on the ground has been done and that there are bottleneck s because of a Nala near Urdu University and Green Line near Nazimabad.

[3] The Secretary Railways states that if the Government of Sindh take s immediate action and ma kes way for the Railways at these two bottleneck s, the remaining wor k of KCR will be completed and it will be made operational. 4. The Secretary Railways also states that there are railway crossing s at which the Government of Sindh has undertaken to provide for construction of either overhead or underground roads /paths , so that there is no eventual ity of any one crossing the railway line. 5.

[4] We direct the Chief Secretary, Government of Sindh to ensure that the above three items of work are expeditiously completed to enable KCR to run in Karachi . Let a r eport, in this re gard, be submitted by the Chief Secretary, Government of Sindh within a period of two weeks. The Chief Secretary, Government of Sindh so also the Commissioner , Karachi shall be present on the next date of hearing . 6.

[5] We have noted that the overall Railway s in Paki stan is not being operated in a way it should be operated ; more so, in accordance with the Rules and Manuals of Railways , on account of which accidents are tak ing place frequently , in which precious lives are being HRC No.13316 -P of 2018 3 lost and great damage to the Rai lways is caused .

[6] There seems to be nothing in sight by which the operation of the Railways in Paki stan could be improved , as not only is the infrastructure of the Railways altogether bad and non -workable but also its employees are apparently not fit to ope rate the Railways. There need s to be serious thinking on the part of the Government of Pakistan regarding the operation of the Pakistan R ailways and over hauling the Secretariat from top to bottom to ensure that the Railways operate in Pakistan safely.

[7] We e xpect that such measures will be taken by the Government of Pakistan immediately to ensure that the Railway s do not play with the lives of the people and its properties are not lost. A report, in this regard , may be made available to the Court by the Gover nment of Pakistan through the Planning Commission with in one month. 7.

[8] Adjourned. To be fixed after one month . Chief Justice Islamabad, the , 9th July, 2020 Mahtab/* ‘NOT APPROVED FOR REPORTING ’ Judge