Case No: I.C.A.3/2011
Case Title: Case_2537
Subject: N/A
Judge: Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry
Judgment Date: 18-05-2011
Upload Date: 18-05-2011
Citations: PLD 2011 SC 680
SC Citations: 2011 SCP 25
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/ICA3,4,6TO11of2011dt2011.04.pdf

[1] ORDER IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ. - Listed appeals filed on behal f of Justice Hasnat Ahmed Khan and Justice Syed Shabbar Raza Rizvi have been fixed before this Special Bench in pursuance of request made on their behalf by their learned counsel. He has concluded his arguments. ICA 3 & 4 -2011 2 2.

[2] Immediately thereafter, Mr. S.M. Zafar , learned Sr. ASC and other learned counsel present in Court have informed that against the same judgment few other appeals ha ve been filed , therefore, it w ill be appropriate that all the cases are clubbed and disposed of together , after hearing them. It i s to be noted that on the request for hearing of the case made by the learned counsel appearing for the appellants, instant Bench was constituted.

[3] No other request for fixation of the other cases was received by the office within time; therefore, the same were not fixed along with these appeals . Be that as it may, in the interest of justice, we consider it appropriate to allow the learned counsel appearing in other appeals to make application for hearing of their cases before this Bench today till 2: 30 p.m. and on receipt of such application for urgent hearing, the cases shall be fixed on 21.02.2011 before this Bench. 3.

[4] The Registrar has put up following note: - “The Worthy Registrar, Peshawar High Court informed me that Mr. Justice Jehanzeb Rahim passe d an order on 17.02.2011 in his Chambers to issue contempt notices to some Hon . Judges of the Supreme Court, even though no such contempt proceedings were pending in the Peshawar High Court .

[5] However, the Hon. Chief Justice, Peshawar High Court initially to ok up the matter on the administrative side and passed an order on the same day saying that the order is passed in vacuum, hence need not be acted upon by the office. That today this matter was examined on the judicial side by a 3 -member bench, which set aside the said order. ” It seems that the persons whose cases are pending before the 4-Member Bench of this Court , instead of obeying the orders of the Court have started making attempts to undermine the authority of the Hon’ble Judges of th is Court, particularly the Hon’ble Members of the Bench and have issued notices to all of them to appear , as has been done by Justice Jehanzeb Rahim of the Peshawar High Court , according to the note reproduced hereinabove.

[6] Although the order ICA 3 & 4 -2011 3 passed by him has bee n set aside by the Peshawar High Court on the judicial side, but in order to preserve and protect the dignity and respect of the Hon’ble Judges of the Bench seized with the matter as well as other Judges of this Court , and in order to ensure that system of administration of justice and honour of this institution including High Courts and District Courts is preserved, we are constrained to pass order that all the six Judges, namely, Syed Shabbar Raza Rizvi, Hasnat Ahmed Khan, Syed Hamid Ali Shah and Syed Saj jad Hussain Shah (Lahore High Court), Justice Ms Yasm een Abbasey (High Court of Sindh), Justice Jehanzeb Rahim (Peshawar High Court) and Justice Sayed Zahid Hussain (Supreme Court) shall not pass any such order against the Members of the Bench or the Judge s of the Supreme Court , and if any such order is passed by them, the same shall have no legal or binding effect upon this Court as well as any other functionaries in the country and shall be deemed to be an order, which is not in existence at all.

[7] IFTIKH AR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ. JAVED IQBAL, J. MIAN SHAKIRULLAH JAN, J. TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, J. MIAN SAQIB NISAR, J. SARMAD JALAL OSMANY , J. AMIR HANI MUSLIM , J. Islamabad, February 18 , 2011 APPROVED FOR REPORTING