Case No: J.P.40/2017
Case Title: Gulshan Shah v. The State
Subject: Life Imprisonment/Sessions
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed
Judgment Date: 30-11-2020
Upload Date: 03-07-2021
Citations: 2021 SCMR 1456
SC Citations: 2021 SCP 194
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/j.p._40_2017.pdf

[1] judgment dated 27.05.2014 passed by the Lahore High Court Bahawalpur Be nch in Criminal Appeal No.97 -J of 2010 with M.R. No.8 of 2010 ) Gulshan Shah …Petitioner(s) Versus The State …Res pondent (s) For the Petitioner(s): Mr. Muhammad Tayyab Wattoo, ASC For the State : Mirza Abid Majeed, Deputy Prosecutor General Pu njab Date of hearing: 30.11.2020.

[2] JUDGMENT Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Safdar Shah, 30 and his brother Iqbal Shah, 35 , were done to death at 8:00 a.m. on 15.4.2003 within the precincts of Police Station Qaim Pur of District Bahawalpur . The petitioner and his brother Zia Shah (since P.O.) , no other than their paternal nephews , along with their father, were arrayed as accused in the crime report lodged by deceased’s brother Ayyaz Hussain Shah (PW -1) at 11:00 a.m.

[3] According to the complainant, his fath er had forsaken his son Ashiq Shah for being disobedient and, thus, also wit hheld his share in the property and in this backdrop, his sons assaulted the deceased with an hatchet and club on the fateful day . The accused absconded after the occurrence , Zia Shah, being still away from law till date, however, the petitioner was arrested on 24.1.2006 to contest indictment that resulted into his conviction vide judgment dated 25.02.2010; convicted on two counts under clause (b) of Section 302 of the Pakistan Pe nal Code, 1860, he was sentenced to death and imprisonment for life respectively; the High Court maintained the conviction, however, altered penalty of death into imprisonment for life vide impugned judgment dated 27.05.2014 , pre-trial period inclusive , vires whereof, are being assailed through captioned jail petition , argued by Mr.

[4] Muhammad Tayyab Watto, ASC ; he contends that in a divided family, fraught with animosity, the courts erred in placing implicit reliance on the testimony of witnesses, Jail Petition No. 40 of 2017 2 manifest ly interested without proper corroboration ; that there is nothing on the record to demonstrate that Muhammad Shah had ever ostracized his son Ashiq Shah so as to deprive him of his share in the legacy ; that acquittal of Ashiq Shah raised the entire edifice of the prosecution to the ground , leaving no space to sustain the conviction .

[5] Learned Law Officer has faithfully defended the impugned judgment by arguing that division in the family notwithstanding, the case is firmly structured upon ocular account furni shed by the natural witnesses with no earthly reason to swap or substitute the actual offenders ; he has further elaborated that the admitted division in the household , in fact , served as a strong motive that appears to have prompted the petitioner and his co-accused to take on the deceased in their prime youth and in a manner most brute and callous . 2.

[6] Heard. Record perused. 3. Acquittal of Ashiq Shah, assigned no role whatsoever, does not cast its shadows to possibly space an exit to the petitioner who armed with hatchet (P -1) fatally stabbed Iqbal Shah , a circumstance that convincingly conjoins medical evidence with ocular account furnished by witnesses, no less than three in number, unanimously pointing their finger upon the petitioner ; the testimony does not suffer from any serious infirmity or flaw reflecting upon credibility of the deponents .

[7] The cross -examination has further highlighted the cleavage in the family and, thus, seemingly there was no occasion for the High Court to even discard the motiv e in order to mould the sentence of death into imprisonment for life , disregard ing the magnitude of violence suffered by the deceased , however, a fait acompl i too late in the day to be revisited in the absence of any motion by the complainant or the State .

[8] Petitioner’s long absence from law is yet another aspect that intriguingly reflects upon the hypothesis of his innocence . The courts below have rightly relied upon the prosecution evidence to return and uphold a guilty verdict that calls for no interferen ce. However, given the role assigned to the petitioner qua Iqbal Shah deceased alone, sentences awarded to the petitioner shall run concurrently with the benefit already extended.

[9] Petition fails. Leave declined. Judge Judge Islamabad, the 30th Novembe r, 2020 Not approved for reporting Azmat /-