Case No: J.P.252/2020
Case Title: Rehmat Ali v. The State
Subject: Life Imprisonment/Sessions
Judge: Mr. Justice Ali Baqar Najafi
Judgment Date: 26-05-2025
Upload Date: 21-08-2025
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2025 SCP 290
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/j.p._252_2020.pdf

[1] JUDGMENT ALI BAQAR NAJAFI. J.- Through this jail petition leave to appeal is sought against the impugned judgment passed by the conviction of life Lahore High Court, Lahore whereby the imprisonment under section 376(1) PPC along with payment of fine of Rs.35,000/- to the petitioner awarded by the learned trial court was maintained.

[2] Briefly the prosecution case against the appellant is that on 2. daughter informed her mother/complainant (PW-1) and her maternal uncle Muhammad Nawaz (PW-2) that the appellant her _________ ;................... ■. ‘3 ; Mr. Sajjad Hussain Bhatti, Deputy PG Punjab■ t 5 17.03.2020 Lahore inPRESENT: Justice Muhammad Hashim Khan Kakar Justice Ishtiaq Ibrahim Justice Ali Baqar NajafiSUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN (Appellate Jurisdiction) Jail Petition No. 252 of 2020 [Against the judgment dated passed by Lahore High Court, Crl.A.No . ) was reported to the police and after obtaining permission from the02.10.2010 at 2.00 p.m.

[3] Mst. Tayyaba/victim (PW-3) the minor own father had committed rape with her whereafter the matter / -2-7. Jail Pelilion NO.252 of2020 3. the High Court which was dismissed on 17.03.2020, hence this jail .11concerned Ilaqa Magistrate the medical of the victim (Exh.PB) was got conducted and the FIR (Exh.PA/2) was registered.

[4] After arrest of the appellant, the report under section 173 Cr.P.C. was submitted before the trial court where he was indicted but he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. The prosecution produced both documentary as well as oral evidence and tendered report of Chemical Examiner (Exh.PD). Learned trial court relied upon the statement of the victim (PW-3) and the corroborated medical report (Exh.PD) convicted the petitioner vide judgment dated 28.09.2013.

[5] The Crl.A.No.l302 of 2016 was preferred before 3 ■I- i had committed "mrong act” with her. She felt severe pain. 5. According to the complainant (PW-1), the appellant had committed zina with Tayyaba (PW-3) when she was alone in her house. The police recorded her statement (Exh.PA) and Tayyaba (PW-3) was got examined by the doctor (PW-6) and she producedpetition. 4.

[6] The prosecution produced the complainant/Sakina Bibi (PW- 1) mother of the victim and the wife of the appellant and according to her she was married to appellant  years before and during the wedlock 04 sons and 02 daughters were born. Before the occurrence, the appellant had kicked her out of his house after giving her a severe beating, whereafter she went to the house of her parents situated adjacent to the house of her husband/the appellant.

[7] He also snatched the children from her. On 02.10.2010 her daughter Tayyaba (PW-3)/victim aged  years came to her and disclosed before her while weeping that her father/appellant -3-7. Jail Petition NO.252 of2020 the last worn clothes before the doctor. In her cross-examination, dissolution of marriage against the appellant.

[8] She admitted that she was residing in the house of the appellant at the time of examined by the (^octor and that Muhammad Nawaz (PW-2) her brother and two police officials washed by the victim on the instructions of the appellant and some Rashida came to her for a compromise. Muhammad Nawaz, her brother (PW-2) supported the 6. statement of her sister but admitted in cross-examination that occurrence had taken place on 02.10.2010 which was confrontedthe appellant had expelled her from his house but after her expulsion, the children did not meet her in her fathers house.

[9] She 01.10.2010 Mst. Bushra andrecording of evidence. She admitted that she was not present in Khurshid Bibi related to the appellant were present there. It wasthe room when Tayyaba (PW-3) was had denied the suggestion that onwere not washed. She could not remember the exact date on which .t. ' - ' • <-the complainant (PW-1) stated that the age of elder son was 12 years, younger/Umair 11 years, Zubair 09 years and then is Tayyaba^whereas Hadia was  years.

[10] According to her Nauman  years son was killed by the appellant but she had not lodged ^ny FIR regarding his murder. She admitted that the appellant had not divorced her so far though a month ago she had filed a suit for were present outside. She admitted that Bushra, Rasheeda and noon time when she went to the hospital.

[11] Some clothes were with his previous statement (Exh.DA) and likewise the factum of , washing of clothes was also confronted with his previous statement. He had admitted that Rehmat/appellant is sole son of -4-7. Jail Petition NO.252 of2020 his parents and he has 07 sisters. He has denied the suggestion handed over to Sakina Bibi (PW-1) on 01.10.2010 by Mst.Bushra and Rashida.

[12] He denied the suggestion that he was not present at the time of occurrence. Besides, we have noticed that Mst. Tayyaba (PW-3) was not 7. asked any question by the court and had also not recorded separate note that she was fit to make a statement. However, she admitted that she was studying in class 3 and she came to the house after studying from school without giving exact date.

[13] According to her, the appellant punished her to hold her ears and had beaten her with a bat and “Ballon ”. He directed her to jump from the rooftop or inflict a churri injury accident by running over by a car. This way she would receive take her. Her brother was in the courtyard when her father switched off the lights of the room and then he took her to other room where he switched on the lights and directed her to put off the clothes and started the knocked at the door.

[14] Her brother told her father that her aunt had had thrown her on the other side. She started bleeding and her shalwar was also stained. He directed her to wash her clothes. After  days she went to her mother/complainant and narrated her the story while weeping. In cross-examination she admitted that her father was working in Bata factory and after work he used to come back at about 6..00 p.m.

[15] Her father did not allow herthat Mst. Tayyaba/minor (PW-3) was some injury and then the complainant/her mother would come to come outside. His father gave “Mukka ” blow on her belly and thenor die through an “mischief ’. Meanwhile, someone 7. Jail Petition NO.2S2 of2020 -5- to go outside the house. The paternal grandfather remained at home on the day as he did not work on the day.

[16] She was confronted with her previous statement that after  days she • went to her mother. She admitted that she did not narrate anything to lady doctor. According to her, she had come to the court from the house of her father. 8. Naheed Suhaib WMO (PW-6) gave the medical evidence and 11 according to her on 03.10.2010 Tayyaba (PW-3) the daughter of the appellant was brought by the police for medical examination at 6.00 p.m. where she was also accompanied by her mother and with whose permission her daughter was medically examined who narrated that victim was raped by her father after when she went to her “Mehka ” after quarrel with her husband 08 days ago.

[17] Last time the act was statedly committed on 01.10.2010 at 2.00 p.m. The relatives of Rehmat/appellant, according to her, requested her to come back to home but she refused and asked her children to come to her whereafter Bushra, Rashida and her husband, Zafar, brought the girl and gave her custody to her mother.

[18] On examination minor scar mark on her hip were present which the girl said that she had been beaten with brush. On perineal examination, hymen was torn, multiple fresh and healed tears were present. Bleeding was positive. A deep tear in the vagina in positive. Vagina admitted one finger easily. According to the Chemical Examiner report the swabs were not stained with semen and blood and there were less chances of detection of semen afteri the mid line extending superficially and oozing of blood was -6- 7.

[19] Jail Petition NO.252 of2020 /lapse of four days and in the final opinion on the basis of clinical examination and findings the victim was subjected to the sexual act. However, in the cross-examination, she had improved her opinion on the basis of the report of Chemical Examiner and DNA test, according to which no sexual act might have been committed with the victim.

[20] Mushtaq Ahmad SI (PW-5) conducted the investigation who 9. admitted that the complainant had not produced any clothes of Tayyaba (PW-3) to him. Ijaz Ali SI (PW-7) stated that he collected the DNA report and that inhabitants of locality were not got associated by him during investigation. He admitted that exact date of commission of zina was not mentioned in contents of FIR. investigation that she moved application for taking custody of children.

[21] He admitted that he had not seen any blood spot on the body of the victim nor any mark of violence on the body of the victim were noted. No bed or bed sheet was collected during the investigation. Muhammad Yousaf ASI (PW-8) drafted the formal FIR (Exh.PA/1). Karamat Ali 11107/C (PW-9) received the parcels of clothes of victim/Tayyaba (PW-3) which he deposited to the office of Chemical Examiner on the same day but its report was not available.

[22] Even in the statement under section 342 Cr.P.C. the 10. appellant denied all the suggestion and in question “why this case against you and why the PWs deposed against you? ”, he replied as under :-He also admitted that Mst.Sakina Bibi disclosed during -7- 7. Jail PetUion NO.252 of2020. whereafter he went to the Arguments heard.

[23] Record perused.12. i 13. that the complainant (PWl)was brought to herappellant visited his house an house after quarrel on petty matter house of Rehmat Ali at evening time along with his wife, Rasheeda Roshra to effect a compromise. They also went to the house of as the brother (PW-(DW-1) and according to him which made her happy.

[24] The minor Sakina Bibi (PW-1). On the following day, the compromise was not effected, therefore, the false FIR was lodged.“Ans. Mst. Bushra, Mst Rasheeda and her husband namely Zafar brought the girl to her mother. Further Mst. Sakma Bibi rrianaged whole occurrence and lodged false FIR agamst me on petty mattes and went to the house of her parents time and ag£n.

[25] She demanded the house of my father namely Ebrahim that same be given to her. She compelled me and my father m documents of the house in favour of the reaard my aged father prepared agreement/Iqrar Nama in favour of Mst. Sakina Bibi, complainant wherein itis given to the complainant. The photo copy of this document earli^ prepared when this document was written.

[26] At the original Iqrar Nama was not given to thehue and cry to take this document. She also compelled me and my father to iZve the house at once but my father denied toso and said agreement was burnt at the same time. This is one of the reasorc The other reason is that she left my house without any reason I then submitted an application before the N^^n Union Council for compromise and notice was issued to Mst.

[27] The photo copy of the agreement and application are herewith attached as Annex-A and B.” 11. In defence, the appellant produced Muzaffar Ah Azad @ Zafar  days before the occurrence the d informed that his wife had left his and Bushrq to effect a compromise parents of Sakina Bibi (PW-1) who sought time 2) of Sakina Bibi was not present at house.

[28] Sakma Bibi (PW-1) asked them to bring the daughters though he Hadia was also handed over to Scanning the prosecution evidenqe it has come on record is still the wedded wife of the appellant though she had already filed a suit for dissolution of marriage against her husband after a quarrel when she went to the house of -8-1.

[29] Jail Petition NO.252 of2020 case I brought to the hospital where ■jii iher father which was just adjacent to the house of her husband, informed his brother (DW-1) about the subjected to rape by the appellant at 2.00 p.m. the statement of victim recorded Examiner ’s report no rape was her. This leaves the court to a serious question on the credibility of the statement of the victim (PW3) and the possibility of falsegrand father and brother but no one objected.

[30] According to theThe appellant then dispute / quarrel upon which his wife and other ladies came to his house. Thereupon, a meeting took place in the house of the complainant (PW-1) during which two daughters, namely, Hadia handed over to her mother (PWl) but. she was at home. However, without certification of the Presiding Officer about the capacity of the child creates doubt about her credibility and, therefore, requires strong corroboration.

[31] Even otherwise her statement reveals that she was beaten and threatened in the presence of her maternal-and Tayyaba (PW-3) were unfortunately, the compromise could not be effected. However, the of the complainant (PW-1) is that Tayyaba (PW-3) was  days ago when complainant (PW-1) the victim was she was examined in her presence.

[32] However, the doctor ’s opinion is self-contradictory as in her examination in chief she (PW-4) stated that the victim was subjected to rape but in the cross- examination she categorically stated that on the basis of Chemical found to have been committed with implication of the appellant. Why such serious allegations were levelled against the appellant, may be due to the fact came on record that there was a dispute between the complainant (PW-1) and the appellant who otherwise is the only son, with six sisters, of -9- 7.

[33] Jail Petition NO.252 of2020 with due care and caution. based on witnesses but are occurrence. In this view of the matter, we 15. Resultantly, wefind the prosecution evidence discarded.the relevant questions and their answers situation the statement of TayyXa Bibi & another (PLD 2020 SC 146)case the its trust worthiness, converted this petition into appeal which issuch statement credible.In the given victim (PW-3) needs strong corroboration.

[34] In the present complainant (PW-1) and her brother (PW-2) are not the eye the hearsay witnesses, thus it was an unseen deficient oftherefore, isserious allegation of being an standard of proof by the credible prosecution witnesses is required. A rare allegation of one of the most serious offences committed in the presence of other children and old father of the convict in the house had been levelled.

[35] According to the victim herself, she was beaten by the appellant, therefore, her statement is to be weighedhis parents. Besides, the appellant and the complainant (PWl) are also first cousins. According to the complainant (PW-1) no time and date of occurrence was narrated by the victim. Whenever a incestuous father is levelled higher 14 We have also noticed that the trial court had also not put the Rationality Test to the child witness (PW-3) prior to recording of her statement.

[36] Under Article 3 of the Qanun-e-Shahadat Order, 1984, a child is a competent witness if he/she passes a standard of the sufficient maturity of understanding about the facts which were to be narrated by herJ A note/observation by the court, would make -10-7. Jail Petition NO.252 of2020 allowed accordingly.

[37] The sentence and conviction of the appellant is set-aside. He be released forthwith if not required in any other case. Approved for reporting.A.QadoosISLAMABAD 26.05.2025