Case No: J.P.417/2019
Case Title: Jabar Ali v. The State
Subject: Life Imprisonment/Sessions
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed
Judgment Date: 29-09-2021
Upload Date: 13-10-2021
Citations: 2021 SCMR 1902
SC Citations: 2021 SCP 282
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/j.p._417_2019.pdf

[1] judgment dated 14.05.2019 passed by the Lahore High Co urt Lahore in Cr.A No. & Cr. Rev. Noi.) Jabar Ali …Petitioner (s) VERSUS The State …Respondent (s) For the Petitioner (s): Nemo For the State Ch. Muhammad Sarwar Sidhu, Addl. A.G. P unjab Date of Hearing: 29.09.2021 O R D E R Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J.- Indicted for committing Qatl-i-Amd of Muhammad Hussain deceased,  , Jabar Ali, petitioner, was returned a guilty verdict by a learned Addl.

[2] Sessions Judge at J hang vide judgment dated 22.06.2016 ; convicted under clause (b) of section 302 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860, he was sentenced to imprisonment for life along with compensation , vide judgment dated 22.6.2016, upheld by a learned Judge -in-Chamber of the Lahore High Court vide impugned judgment dated 14.05.2019, vires whereof, are being assailed through the captioned petition.

[3] Reported to the police by Arshad Mehmood (PW -8), the incident occurred at 8:30 p.m. on 9.10.2014 within the precincts of Police S tation Ahmad Pur Sial , District Jhang , in a marriage ceremony , when petitioner’s presence amongst the women folk was objected by the deceased; the former retaliated , outside the house, with a fire shot on the left side of latter’s chest ; the second shot we nt astray ; autopsy confirmed receipt of fatal shot , within the preceding 24 hours, being the immediate cause of death .

[4] Spot inspection includes seizure of casings (Ex.P -), forensically found wedded with a .30 caliber pistol (P -6), recovered pursuant to petitioner’s disclosure on 26.10.2014 . As the petitioner claimed trial, the prosecution primarily relied upon ocular account , its mainstay, comprising statements of Arshad Jail Petition No.

[5] Mehmood (PW -8) and Liaqat Ali (PW -9), concurrently received with approval by the Cou rts below . 2. We have independently gone through the statements of the witnesses with the assistance of learned Law Officer to find that on the fateful night, the petitioner, the deceased and the witnesses , related to one another, were present inside the house of Ghulam Shabbir in Rasm -e-Hina of his son Javed Akhtar ; the invitees included a number of females , traditionally participating in the event and it is in this backdrop that petitioner’s stroll amongst the ladies was viewed as an act unbecoming by the deceased , suggesting recusal .

[6] It is shortly thereafter that the petitioner targeted the deceased in front of Ghulam Shabbir’s house , a point vividly depicted in the unrebutted site plan (Ex.PB/I); graphic details of the incident furnished by both the wi tnesses have been found by us straightforward and confidence inspiring ; considerable distance between the venue and the respective abodes of the witnesses , highlighted in the cross -examination, given the occasion , satisfactorily explain their presence at t he scene; both of them comfortably withstood an otherwise inconsequential cross -examination without embarrassment .

[7] Durations recorded by the medical officer are consistent with the prosecution case and so are confirmatory the forensic report as well as rec overy of weapon (P -6). Defence plea that the deceased was done to death by unknown assailants in a dacoity is a position , belatedly introduced for the first time during the trial ; substitution is a rare phenomena, antithetical to retributive human instinct ; formidable prosecution evidence singularly pointed towards petitioner’s culpa bility , in the absence of any foundational basis , does not admit any space to entertain such an hypothesis.

[8] An unreported dacoity involving homicide , allegedly converted into pe titioner’s nomination for the crime , in a small interregnum of time , that too, without any earthly reason , is a story too illusory to find a buyer. Finding of guilt recorded by the trial Court , rightly affirmed by the High Court , found by us on our own ana lysis, being in accord with the principle of safe administration of criminal justice , calls for no interference.

[9] Petition fails. Leave declined. JUDGE JUDGE JUDGE ISLAMABAD 29th September , 2021 Azmat /* “Not approved for Reporting” Jail Petition No.