Case No: Reference.1/2011
Case Title: Reference by the President of Islamic Republic of Pakistan Under Article 186 of the Constitution to revisit the case of Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto reported as PLD 1979 SC Page 38-53
Subject: U/A 186/.
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa
Judgment Date: 12-12-2023
Upload Date: 14-12-2023
Citations: PLD 2024 Supreme Court 509
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 390
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/reference._1_2011.pdf

[1] judgement, Justice Nasim Hasan Shah rejected the contention that the trial of Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto was vitiated by bias on the part of Justice Maulvi Mushtaq Hussain, who presided over the Lahore High Court Bench that conducted the trial. However, this stance stands in direct contradiction to his later remarks in an interview with Iftikhar Ahmad for the program Jawab Deyh .

[2] In the aforesaid interview, Justice Nasim Hasan Shah described Justice Maulvi Mushtaq Hussain as an overt en emy of Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, expressing that he should not have been part of the Lahore High Court Bench. In fact, the presence of Justice Maulvi Mushtaq Hussain on the Lahore High Court Bench was referred to as “Ziadati ”, a term that, within the context of the trial, could only be interpreted as bias.

[3] This clear contradiction in the views of Justice Nasim Hasan Shah raises concerns about the evaluation, in the appeal, of the question of bias on the part of Justice Maulvi Mushtaq Hussain. 8. Justice Nasim Hasan Shah revealed certain facts in his autobiography Memoirs and Reflections , which suggest that his inclusion in the Bench for the purpose of hearing the appeal of Mr.

[4] Bhutto was orchestrated by the Attorney General Sharifuddin Pirzada and Justice Maulvi Mushtaq Hussain. Such manipulation of the Bench composition undermines judic ial impartiality and raises Reference No. 1 of 2011 4 serious concerns about the fairness of the proceedings. It also shows that Justice Maulvi Mushtaq Hussain pursued the matter zealously even after the High Court had decided the case and the appeal was pending before the Supreme Court, despite his role havi ng concluded with the decision of the High Court.

[5] This unwarranted involvement after conviction blurred the boundaries of judicial propriety and further eroded confidence in the impartiality of the appellate process. 9. The above account of events effectively undermines the duly expected impartiality of judicial decision -making in the trial of Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto.

[6] Such events, if left unaddressed, risk eroding public confidence in the fairness of the judicial pro cess. 10. The extraordinary political climate of the time and the pressures inherent in such an environment appear to have influenced the course of justice in a manner inconsistent with the ideals of judicial independence.

[7] It is a sobering reminder of how devia tions from constitutional governance can exert undue influence on judicial proceedings in politically charged cases, undermining the ideals of impartiality and due process in such exceptional circumstances. This also accentuates the importance of recognizi ng the courageous dissents of Justice Dorab Patel, Justice Muhammad Haleem and Justice G.

[8] Safdar Shah who stood their ground despite the prevailing atmosphere. Their dissents, even if unsuccessful in altering the outcome, remain a testament to the enduring principles of judicial integrity and impartiality, underscoring the value of an independent judiciary committed to the rule of law. Reference No. 1 of 2011 5 Opinion 11.

[9] In light of the foregoing discussion, I am of the considered opinion that the requirements of due process and fair trial were not complied with in the murder trial of Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto by the trial court and the appellate court. Judge Islamabad. 17th December, 2024. Approved for reporting.