Case No: S.M.C.14/2010
Case Title: Case_2509
Subject: N/A
Judge: MR. JUSTICE GHULAM RABBANI
Judgment Date: 01-09-2010
Upload Date: 01-09-2010
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2010 SCP 10
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/SMC14of2010.pdf

[1] judgment of the trial Court. Question – V. Whether Shehen Shah Bu khari, SI/first investigator of the incident and Dr . Mohammad Farooq, post mortem examiner destroyed and suppressed medical evidence about the murder of two brothers? Answer: Shehen Shah Bukhari, SI/Investigator and the postmortem examiner concealed and suppressed the brutal violence and recorded their respective reports as if both the deceased persons suffered a few injuries.

[2] The doctor and the investigator are liable to face the legal consequences for having destroyed and suppressed medical evidence in s upport of the charge of murder on two counts. I propose that both the dead bodies of Mughees and Muneeb may be exhumed and re -examined by a board of senior doctors well versed in SMC No.  4 medical jurisprudence and enjoying good repute, failing which ocular account furnished by eye witnesses would remain uncorroborated.

[3] Question – VI. Whether the rescue workers attached with rescue station located at the spot did not perform their duty qua the incident under inquiry? Answer: The rescue workers initially discharged t heir duty honestly and passed on information of the incident to the police promptly. Later on, they mortgaged their legal functions and duties to the crowd and the local police. 2.

[4] The above report was received in a sealed cover which has been opened in front of Advocate General, Punjab, and conclusion drawn by Mr. Kazim Ali Malik, author of the report has been reproduced hereinabove. As the case relating to the incident of murders of two brothers in Sialkot seems to be of its own nature which is evident from the contents of the report and other material, while exercising restraint, the question of involvement or otherwise of the accused persons we leave this issue for further investigation by the police.

[5] Copy of the report has been handed over to the Advocate General. Additionally , it being a report of importance which has highlighted all necessary aspects of the case, therefore, it is ordered to be made public. In this behalf, the Home Secretary, Punjab, shall publish its important aspects in the newspapers but it would not cause prejudice in any manner to the case of the accused persons. 3.

[6] D.P.O. has also submitted a report. According to him the same is based upon the deliberations and considerations undertaken by a Joint Investigation Tea m (JIT) headed by Mr. Mushtaq Ahmed Sukhera, SMC No.  5 Additional I.G. Police as Convener and Major (R) Mubashar DIG (Commandant PTS Shoongh), Mr. Abdur Razzaq Cheema SP, Special Branch, Gujranwala Region and Malik Fayyaz Ahmed, DSP, Sambrial, as Members of JIT, in response to direction of this Court, whereby police was allowed to continue with the investigation without being prejudiced by the present proceedings as well as the inquiry which has been ordered to be conducted.

[7] Contents of report indicates that 17 pers ons, namely, Jamil alias Jeela Faqir s/o Allah Rakha, Qaiser @ Mooda s/o Ahmed Ali, Hassan Raza s/o Mukhtar Ahmad, Jamshed @ Cheeda s/o Shaukat Ali, Muhammad Ikram s/o Muhammad Rasheed, Muhammad Asghar s/o Munir Ahmed, Rashid s/o Liaqat Ali, Nadeem Hussain s/o Shukar Din, Muhammad Iqbal s/o Sardar, Sarfraz Ahmed s/o Muhammad Safdar, Amin s/o Muhammad Ashraf, Muhammad Waris s/o Muhammad Hussain, Asghar Ali s/o Ahmed Ali, Shams Ali s/o Ghulam Ali, Ali Peter s/o Altaf, Ateeb @ Nosha s/o Arshad, Awais s/o Abdur Razaq being civilian and ten police officials including Waqar Ahmed Chohan, former DPO, Sialkot, prima -facie, seem to be involved, therefore, they have been arrested.

[8] According to Mr. Sukhera i nvestigation is going on , and on completion of the same , chal lan shall be submitted before the Anti - terrorism Court under the Anti -terrorism Act, 1997. Four of the accused persons, namely, Rana Muhammad Ilyas, Inspector/former SHO, Waris Ali, ASI, Tariq Mehmood and Mubarik Ali, constables are said to have not been arrested so far and that e fforts are being made to cause their arrest.

[9] D.P.O. Sialkot, Mr. Bilal Ahmed Kamyana, is hereby directed to cause their arrest without any further delay and submit report tomorrow. Let the police complete the investigation and collect evidence and challan be submitted before the Court in accordance with law. Report shall also be sent to the Registrar of this Court for our perusal .

[10] The disposal of the case shall be ensured expeditiously in view of the judgment of this Court in the case of sh. Liaquat Hussain and others v. Federation of Pakistan through Ministry of Law (PLD 1999 SC 504). SMC No.  6 4. Mr. Nasir Qureshi, SP Investigation, who, according to him, has recently been posted as In -charge of the Investigation of F.I.R. , when inquired about the nominated accused persons, could not answer satisfactorily except saying that no one was nominated as the accused in the commission of offence nor any supplementary statement was recorded by the complainant, that there is no mentio n in the case diary about the involvement of Mughees Sajjad and Muneeb Sajjad and according to him after 19 th August, 2010 no further case diary has been written by the I.O.

[11] This clearly indicates carelessness on his part knowing well the importance of t he incident which has brought bad name to the police department as well as in the civilized society of this country. Therefore, we direct learned Advocate General Punjab, who is present in Court, that he should take steps that the investigation of this c ase be also handed over, if permissible under the law, to the same Investigating Team which has been appointed to investigate the case F.I.R.

[12] No.449 of 2010. In this behalf , he shall submit a report by tomorrow. 5. During hearing it trans pired that Haf iz Imran who had spread the infor mation/news about the incident is present in Court. He is District Reporter Sialkot of TV Channel “ Dunya News” and ha d prepared the film of the whole incident .

[13] On the basis of his information the news of incident spread on all the TV Channels, and the matter also came in to the notice of th is Court . Although the proceedings were initiated on the footage being shown by the “ Geo News” , it was on account of his bold acts and courage the footage was telecast through his channel as well .

[14] He has now been injured by unknown person s with injuries on his right arm as is evident SMC No.  7 from his presence in the Court. We appreciate the courage which he has shown and at the same time we direct the DPO, Sialkot that necessary protection be pr ovided to his person and his family and the person s who are responsible for causing him injury and the one who has threatened him, shall be dealt with in accordance with law. 6.

[15] It has also been informed that PPO Punjab at the same time has initiated departmental action against the official/officers of police department , prima -facie, who are involved in th e incident . Adjourned to 2nd September, 2010. Chief Justice Judge Judge Islamabad 01.09 .2010 Zulfiqar