Case No: S.M.C.1/2024
Case Title: In the matter of letter dated 25th March 2024 of the Six Judges of the Islamabad High Court v.
Subject: U/A 184(3)
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa
Judgment Date: 03-04-2024
Upload Date: 03-05-2024
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2024 SCP 148
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/s.m.c._1_2024.pdf

[1] ORDER Pursuant to the order dated 3 April 2024 the five High Courts have submitted their respective proposals which were read out by the learned Attorney -General for Pakistan (‘ AG’). Proposals were also sought from the Pakistan Bar Council (‘ PBC’) and the Supreme Court Bar Association (‘SCBA ’). PBC has submitted its proposals and the Vice President and Additional Secretary of SCBA state that since a meeting of the SCBA had not taken place they will be submitting their proposals before the next date of hearing. 2.

[2] Few petitions and a number of applications have been filed by other bar councils and bar ass ociations seeking to be joined as parties to these proceedings. Others too have filed similar applications. However, we will only entertain the same to the extent of considering proposals made therein. 3. It would be appropriate and helpful if bar council s and bar associations come together and preferably file one document containing their proposals.

[3] However, if agreement cannot be reached amongst them they may file separate proposals. 4. If any bar council or association wants to obtain copies of the proposals submitted by the High Courts they may obtain the same from the office. 5. The learned AG may also submit proposals on behalf of the Federation.

[4] With regard to the allegations levelled in the letter of the six Hon’ble Judges of the Islamabad High Co urt against the Federation, or any agency under the Federal Government, responses thereto be submitted through the learned AG before the next date of hearing. 6. To come up on Tuesday, 7 May 2024 at 11.30 am.

[5] SMC No. 1 of 2024 etc. 5 Qazi Faez Isa , CJ. Syed Mansoor Ali Shah J. Jamal Khan Mandokhail, J. The Federal Government has to submit its response to the grave status of interference by the executive as highlighted by all the High Courts. This is the most serious and grave undermining of the independence of ju diciary which cannot be trivialised.

[6] The Federal Government controls the Intelligence Agencies and it is for it to explain its position before this Court. The buck stops with the Federal Government. The High Courts have indicated that the phenomenon has ex isted till recently. Athar Minallah, J. Musarrat Hilali, J. Naeem Akhtar Afghan, J.