Case No: S.M.C.18/2010
Case Title: Suo Moto action regarding violatin of Public Procurement Rules, 2004 in procurement loss of billions of rupees of exchequer case by National Insurance Compant Ltd.
Subject: U/A 184(3)
Judge: Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry
Judgment Date: 22-11-2013
Upload Date: 22-11-2013
Citations: 2014 SCMR 585
SC Citations: 2013 SCP 138
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/smc.18_2010_final.pdf

[1] order had already SMC  3 been passed by this Court , Amin Qasim Dada was present with the DG, FIA. Be that as it may, DG, FIA is equally responsible for not causing his arrest. It seems that instead of allowing his Director to make progress in the case , he is providing shelter to the accused persons ; therefore, we direct the Additional Director General, FIA, Zafar Ahmed Qureshi to take all necessary steps for causing his arrest and if on a further probe he comes to the conclusion that the accused is being given shelter by the DG, FIA , then he should proceed against the DG too in accordance with law because no one is above the law.

[2] He further explained that all efforts shall be made to explore the possibility as to how the Government money was taken out of the accounts of the NICL , where the same was spent and in whose accounts the same was deposited. In this behalf, he has particularly made reference to the case of M/S Al -Tahoor Co., whose Manager Abdul Maalik has already been arrested and stated during interrogation that the account was opened in Allied Bank Ltd, Airport Road Branch, Lahore in the name of one Adil Manzoor whose name/NIC was used but when said Adil Manzoor was interrogated, he stated that he had no knowledge of the same, but according to the statement of Manager Abdul Maalik , an amount of 22 crores of rupees has been given to Moonis Elahi .

[3] According to him, as progress was being made in the meanwhile , he was transferred and made under orders of DG (Waseem Ahmed) to relinquish the charge immediately. Be that as it may, Zafar Ahmed Qureshi has now again been posted as Additional Director General, FIA, therefore, he would be supervising investigation of the case pertaining the persons concerned. 4.

[4] Director Moazzam Jah also gave progress report, which does not seem satisfactory as no step has been taken by him as well SMC  4 to cause arrest of the accused persons, who had left the country inasmuch as Amin Qasim Dada, who was available in Karachi and accordin g to his information he was sitting with DG, FIA after passing of order by this Court, he ought to have taken necessary steps to cause his arrest .

[5] Similarly, he had taken no steps to recover the amount from the account of Ayaz Khan except making attachment of the property but making no probe in the matter thoroughly fixing the responsibility upon the accused persons , which indicate s that the investigation is not being carried out honestly, fairly and properly.

[6] However, we may give him another chance to proc eed with the matter strictly in accordance with law and submit report on the next date of hearing in this behalf. 5. The Secretary Commerce has stated that he ha s sent a letter to the Auditor General of Pakistan to conduct special audit of the NICL. 6.

[7] The report submitted by the Secretary Interior is also placed on record. 7. Adjourned to 01.02.2011 when the Additional Director General, FIA , Lahore and Director , FIA, Karachi shall attend the Court and submit their report s. CJ. J. J. J. Islamabad, 25.01.2011