Case No: S.M.C.9/2012
Case Title: Suo Moto action regarding irregularities and illegalities in P.I.A.
Subject: Miscelleneous
Judge: Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry
Judgment Date: 21-12-2012
Upload Date: 21-12-2012
Citations: 2013 SCMR 352
SC Citations: 2012 SCP 84
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/S.M.C.9of2012dt-21-12-2012.pdf

[1] order, including taking of such action against those who may be responsible for the wrongs committed in the past, a nd turning a profit -earning organization into a loss making enterprise , which is suffering huge losses. The reform process must also provide a system of checks and balances for the proper running of the affairs of the organization.

[2] However, the learned cou nsel stated that some time be given to the new management to enable it to introduce its reforms. SMC  5 7. Mr. Iqbal Zafar Jhagra and Ms. Marvi Memon petitioners have stated that PIA management is talking about long term measures , whereas they should immediate ly take some short term measures for the purpose of providing facilities to the passengers, as invariably the flights are delayed and passengers have to wait for hours at times, at airports; sometimes they are made to sit inside the craft without ventilati on and air -conditioning etc. and when ever the crew is contacted, they simply show their helplessness.

[3] Ms. Marvi Memon stated that today she had to sit and wait for more than two hours at Karachi Airport and there was no one to explain as to why the flight was late. According to her, sometimes, the PIA crew do offer explanation s but many they do not bother to explain the reason of delay . She stated that such irregularities are required to be taken notice of by this Court as these directly impinge on fundamen tal rights like those mentioned in Article 14 of the Constitution.

[4] She stated that at least direction be issued to the Managements of PIA as well a s the Civil Aviation Authority that they should take steps for ensuring that flights are operate d in time. Wh en we inquired from Raja Muhammad Bashir, Sr. ASC, as to wheth er anyone of the aforesaid seven officers, who had travelled from Karachi to attend the court proceedings was in a position to implement the order of this Court, he stated that he cannot say that anyone of them would be able to do the needful .

[5] This answer on his behalf is sufficient to explain the mismanagement prevailing in PIA. 8. Be that as it may, we adjourn this case for a period of two weeks with directions to the Chairman PIA as well as DG, CAA to ensure that pending decision of the case no flight is delayed and if SMC  6 there are unavoidable circumstances, they must inform the passengers , well in time .

[6] On the next date of hearing the Chairman PIA and DG CAA will put up a comprehensive plan wh ich they intend to initiate for the purpose of improving the condition of PIA , airports , etc. In the meanwhile , all the officers including General Managers , Marketing and Accounts shall file complete documents in respect of appointments of GSA s outside the country and the local agents within the country and the manner in which the tenders are given and the procedure, adopted for the same.

[7] Similarly, GM Human Resources shall also place on record complete record of the employees who were appointed by followin g the procedure in a transparent manner, which has been laid down for making recruitment and those who were appointed without following the procedure by using the phrase “contract employees ” etc. and they should also ensure that in future no such appointme nt shall take place.