Case No: S.M.C.6/2014
Case Title: Suo Moto Action Regarding Rape Victim sets herself Ablaze after Accused freed on Bail.
Subject: U/A 184/Enforcement of Fundamental Rights / Human Rights
Judge: MR. JUSTICE TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, HCJ
Judgment Date: 04-02-2014
Upload Date: 02-04-2014
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2014 SCP 27
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/smc_6_2014.pdf

[1] ORDER Learned Acting Advocate General, Punjab, submits that the investigation is in progress in terms of the previous order of this Court and the same would be finalized soon after the receipt of the report f rom the Punjab Forensic Science Laboratory, Lahore. Requests for two weeks time. 2. At this stage, the mother of Mst.

[2] Amna deceased and her father namely Mst. Nizam Mai and Ghulam Farid have appeared to submit that since certain police officials are invo lved in the affair which led her daughter to set herself ablaze, they feel insecure in the area. They further submitted that all the police officials who tried to protect the accused should also be brought to justice and they be provided State protection. 3.

[3] Confronted with the above grievance of the parents of Mst. Amna deceased, learned Acting Advocate General, Punjab, Mr. Mustafa Ramday submitted that he will get in touch with District S.M.C. NO. 06 OF 2014 2 Police Officer, Muzaffargarh to ensure that all the accused are brought to justice and that the parents of Mst.

[4] Amna and their family is provided protection as and when needed. Learned Law Officer submits that the police officer who earlier on was accused of partisan investigation is behind the bars and the DSP who verified and confirmed the report of innocence of the accused is also nominated in the second case registered vide FIR No.  dated 15.3.2014 at Police Station Bait Mir Hazar under Sections  PPC read with Section 7 of the Anti Terrorism Act and Section 5 -C of Police Order, 2002 but he is on pre -arrest bail.

[5] Assures that the family would be extended full protection. To come up on 21.4.2014 at Lahore, on the availability of Bench. The I.G. Punjab shall ensure that the final report of the investigation i s submitted by or before the said date. CHIEF JUSTICE JUDGE JUDGE Islamabad, the 2nd of April, 2014 Not Approved For Reporting Khurram