Case No: C.A.914-L/2013
Case Title: Malik Tariq Mahmood, etc v. Province of Punjab through District Collector, District Sheikhupura, etc
Subject: Land Acquisition/.
Judge: Mr. Justice Shahid Waheed
Judgment Date: 29-11-2022
Upload Date: 07-12-2022
Citations: 2023 SCMR 102
SC Citations: 2022 SCP 334
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.a._914_l_2013.pdf

[1] Judgment dated 08.10.2013 passed by the Lahore High Court , Lahore, in RFA No.89 of 2009 ] Malik Tariq Mahm ood, etc …Appellant (s) Versus Province of Pu njab, etc …Respondent(s) For Appellant (s) : Malik Muhammad Jamil Awan, ASC, via Video Link from Lahore For Respondent(s) : Malik Asif Taufeeq, Additional Advocate General Mr.

[2] Muhammad Ra mzan, LAC, Lahore Mr. Asjid Javed, SDO Date of Hearing : 29.11.2022 JUDGMENT SHAHID WAHEED , J.— The landowners, c hallenging the decree drawn up in p ursuance of the judgment dated 8th of Oct ober, 2013 made by the Lahore High C ourt in its appellate juris diction under the Land Acq uisition Act, 1894 and, in qu est of gett ing adequate compensation for their land acquired , have presented this direct appeal to u s on the short ground that even though the judgment and decr ee dated 6th of January , 2009 of the Refere nce Court was thereby annulled, the compensation awarded to them w as still meagre and disproportionate to its market value. 2.

[3] The fabric of facts, on which the grievance of the appell ants rests, may be a ppreciated first. O n 21st of July , 1993 the District Collector, Sheikhupura issued a notification (Ex.A.2) under section 4 of the Land Ac quisition Act, 1 894 (“the Act”) to the ef fect that C.A.No.914 -L of 2013.doc - 2 - an extent of 205 kanal s 18 marla s of land in vi llage B addo and Khak i within the limits of Tehsil Ferozewala, District Sheikhupura was intended to be acquired for the public purpose, namely, construction of Link Road Second New Ravi Bridge, Sagia n, Lahore .

[4] No action was taken on this notification for m ore tha n a year and thus it bec ame ineffect ive, and consequently , the District Collector had to issue a fresh notification under section 4 of the Act in respect of the same land and it was gazetted on 1 2th of October, 1994 (Ex.A.3) . This area inclu ded 19 kanals 14 marlas of land, situate in village Baddo, of the appellants.

[5] After the publication of the above notification , the Land Acquisition Collector (“the LAC ”) initiated proceedings for the determination of compensation payable to the various owners o f the la nd acquired. Notices as required under sections 9 and 10 of the Act were served upon the affected persons requiring them to deliver the ir statements re garding nature of their respective interest s in the land and particulars of their claims to comp ensation .

[6] In response to the notices, the appellants appeared before the LAC and got recorded th eir statement s that the ir land was of commercial/industrial kind and demanded compensation at the rate of Rs.70,000/ - per marla. After the usual formalities u nder the Act had bee n gone through by the LAC, he on the basis of evidence delivered his Award on 23rd of April, 1996 (Ex.A.7) , in which 12 kanals 1 0 marla s of the appellants ’ land w as declared to be Ghair Mumkin Chapper and 7 kanals 4 marlas was Nul Chahi (agricu ltural prope rty), and the amount of compensation was fixed at Rs.1200/- per marla. 3.

[7] The appellants were dissatisfied with the Award (Ex.A.7) and in order to se ek a judicious determination of their rights they made C.A.No.914 -L of 2013.doc - 3 - an application before the LAC under se ction 18 of the Act asking him to refer their case to the Court for adjudication. On receipt of this application, the LAC made the required reference to the Court of Senior Civil Judge, Sheikhupur a.

[8] Be it noted that the appellants in their appli cation h ad clearly stated t hat their land had been wrongly de clared Ghair Mumkin Chapper and Nul Chahi whereas it was a commercial/industrial area as indicated by its location. They said it was bounded by Lahore – Sheikhupura Road to the north, a housing scheme t o the west , a 30-feet wide met alled road to the south , behind which was the National Town Housing Scheme and Sheikh Amp ex Factory to the east.

[9] Th e appellants thus clai med compensation at the rate o f Rs.70,000/ - per marla. 4. On a reference being m ade a t the instance of the appellants, the Reference Court invited the respondent s’ reply, on their contest, two issues were framed, and the main issue was wh ether the compensation for the acquired land owned by the appellants was not in accordance with th e market value and w hether the appellants were entitled to enhancement of compensation as prayed for .

[10] For this issue , the appellants produced Mushtaq Ahmad, Patwar i of village Baddo (PW -1), Muhammad Ma soom, former Reader to the LAC (PW -2), Muhammad W aqas, Supervi sor Highway Department (PW -3), Muhammad Zaheer Min has, Civil Engineer /Evaluator (PW -4), while one of the appellants, namely, Malik Tariq Mehmood appeared as his own witness before the Court as P W-5.

[11] Their documentary evidence consisted of 11 docum ents, an d they were, copy of Mutation No.2740 (Ex.A .1), copy of notification dated 21st of July, 1993 (Ex.A.2), copy of notification dated 12th of October, 1994 (Ex.A.3) , copy of notification dated 6th of September , 1995 (Ex.A.4), copy of noti ce C.A.No.914 -L of 2013.doc - 4 - (Ex.A.5), copy of objections (Ex.A.6), copy of Award ( Ex.A.7), copy of letter of Board of Revenue (Ex.A.8), copy of qabz-ul-wasool (Ex.A.9) and copy of evaluation certificates (Ex.A.10 and Ex.A.11).

[12] Whereas the respondents produced their Assistant Land Co ntrol Officer of the Highway Department, that is, Muhammad Khalid as RW-1, and through their counse l tendered copy of notification dated 6th of October , 1994 (Ex.R.1) , copy of receipts regarding payment s (Ex.R.2), copy of statements (Ex .R.3), copy of notic es issued to t he app ellants (Ex.R.4) and copy of Award (Ex.R.5).

[13] It is important to note here that since the Reference Court deemed a local investigation to be proper for the purpose of ascertaining th e location, nature and market value of the appel lants’ land, it issu ed a commission to Abdul Majeed Kausar, Advocate directing him to make such investigation and to report thereon.

[14] Acco rdingly , the Local Commissioner conducted the invest igation and submit ted his report (Ex.C -1) and the evidence taken by him (Ex.C -2), appearing before the Court as CW -1. After considering all the se evidences, the Reference Court came to the conclusion that the appellants ’ demand was not justified a nd the assessment of their land in the Award (Ex.A.7) w as correct and on th at basis dismissed the reference by its judgment dated 6th of January , 2009. 5.

[15] The appellants then carried their first appeal to the Lahore High Court where its Division Bench observed , and rightly did so, that the fa te of their appeal depended on the ans wer to the question whether their land was commercial, residential or agricultural. The learned Judges of the Division Bench then made a comparative study of the reasons recorded in the judgment of the Reference Court and the evidence available on record and their analysi s was tha t the Reference Court erred in agr eeing with the C.A.No.914 -L of 2013.doc - 5 - assessment made by the LAC in his Award (Ex.A. 7), and that it would be unreasonable to assess the land as an agricultural land at Rs.1200/ - per marla; however, concluded that though the land was surro unded b y commercial area, factory area, r esidential colonies, the appellants coul d not prove that their land itself was commercial, a nd thus held that the value of the land should have been Rs.20,000/ - per marla, whi ch was asse ssed by th e LAC fo r the land adjoining th e appella nts.

[16] Accordingly, through judg ment dated 8th of October, 2013, the decree was issued in favour of the appellants in the following terms: a. The appellant s shall be paid compensation for the acquired land at th e rate of Rs.20,000/ - per Marla plus 15% compulsory acquisition charges on th e said amount of compensation. b.

[17] The appel lants shall also be given compound interest at the ra te of 8% per annum from the date of possession to the date of deposit/payment u nder section 28 of the Act, at the enhanced rate of land. c. The app ellants shall also be given compound interest at the rate of 8% per annum u nder section 34 of the Act on the compensation of land determined by the Collector in his award dated 23rd of April , 1996 from the date of tak ing pos session of land to the date of deposit/payment of said amount. 6.

[18] The appellants are still unhappy and want further increase in compensation . Impeaching the judgment and decree passed by the High Court, it has been contended by them that the eviden ce on record c onclusively suggest s that the land was surrounded by a commercial area, and thus it was un necessary t o prove that land C.A.No.914 -L of 2013.doc - 6 - itself was being used for commercial activities, and having regard to the ext ent and bound aries of the land , its market value shou ld have been determined, and for that purpos e only the report of the local commissi on (Ex.C.1 and Ex.C.2) was sufficient, but no Court has given proper consideration to it.

[19] On the other hand, the Add l. Advocate Genera l, taking the stand against the above-stated arguments, submitted that the land of the appellants was a pond , and they have already been adequately compensated, the appeal is liable to be dismissed as it appears to have been filed for unjust enrichment of the appell ants. 7.

[20] The quintessence of the a bove argumen ts reminds us that the main issue to be resolved in this case had t wo components. The first was about the nature and classification of the land, while the second related to its value. Before we enter upon considering the evidence adduce d on t he said issue, we dee m it ap propriate to state some of the principles on which compensation is required to be determined.

[21] Under section 23(1) of the Act, compensation is to be determined on the basis of the market value of the land at the date of pu blicat ion of the no tificati on under section 4 of the Act. The Court assessing compensation is require d to take into consideration not only the present purpose or the presen t use to which the land is applied but also any other more beneficial purpose to w hich it might reasonably be put by the owner .1 Indubitably, it is true that regard can be had only to the existing conditions and what is likely to happen in reasonably near future and compensation cannot be fixed on the basis of what might 1 Vyricherla Narayana Gaja patiraju v.

[22] Revenue Divis ional Officer, Vizag apatam [AIR 1939 PC 98] Malik Aman and others v. Land Acquisition Collec tor and others [PLD 1988 SC 32] C.A.No.914 -L of 2013.doc - 7 - happe n in the d im and distant future. Whe re there is a reasonable possibility of the land being put to a mo re profitable use within a reasonable period the same cannot be ignored in assessing its value .2 Compe nsation has always to be determined by refere nce to the pric e whic h a willing vendor ma y reasonab ly expect to obtain from a willing purchaser .3 When the land possesses some unusual, special or uniqu e features as to its location or potentialities, due weight must b e attached to all these elements .4 After consideri ng all the circums tances, the Court has to arrive at a fair estimate with reference to the surrounding circumstances and evidence in the case and to award a fair compensation on that basis .

[23] The Court further ought to be liberal in the sense that it should not be too meticulous or pedantic in dealing with the evidence. It is also true that an entry in the revenue record as to the nat ure of the land may not be conclusive. If the land acquired is found to be useful both for agricultural or non -agricultural purposes, merely on the ground that it was used as agricultural land by the owner till the time of its acquisition, its potentiality as non-agricultur al land c annot be ignored .5 2 Bailey v.

[24] Isle of Thanet Light Railways Com pany [(1900) 1 QB 722] re An Arb itration between Lucas and the Chesterfield Gas and Water Board [(1909) 1 KB 16] Cedars Rapids Manufacturing and Power Compan y and Lacoste and others [(191 4) AC 569] Fraser a nd others and City of Fraserville [(191 7) AC 187] 3 Fazalur Rahman and others v.

[25] General Manager, SIDB and another [PLD 1986 SC 158] Land Acquisition Collector, GSC, NTDC, (WAPDA), Lahore and another v. Mst. Surraya Mehmood Jan [2015 SCMR 28] Air Weapon Complex through DG v. Muhammad Aslam and others [2018 SCMR 779] 4 Askari Cement Lim ited through Chief Executive v. Land Acq uisitio n Colle ctor (Industries ) Punjab, etc [PLJ 2013 SC 784] 5 Sardar Abdu r Rauf Khan and others v.

[26] The Land Acquisition Collector/Deputy Commissioner, Abb ottabad and others [1991 SCMR 2164] Province of Punj ab th rough Collector, Attock v. Engr. Jamil Ahm ad Malik and others [2000 SCMR 870] Province of Sindh through Collector of District Dad u and others v. Ramzan and others [PLD 2004 SC 512] C.A.No.914 -L of 2013.doc - 8 - 8.

[27] We may now examine the evidence addu ced in this case in the light of the principles, enumerated above, and make a bid to find out the use, nature and kind of the appellants ’ land. As the burden of pro of was placed on the appellants, they first produced the Patwari of the village Baddo as PW-1, who i n his examination - in-chief clearly stated that to the east of the lan d of appellant was Ghulam Rasool’s commercial land, to the west was bypass road (which was Sagian Bridge Road) , to the north was th e Sheikhupura – Lahore Road , and to the south was the commercial area.

[28] This stateme nt was not cross -examined, and thus, it will be deemed to have been admitted by the respondent s.6 Another important witness produced by the appellants to determine the kind of land was a Civil Engineer who was also a professional property evaluator , named Muhammad Zaheer Minhas who appeared as PW-4.

[29] He stated in his examination -in-chief that the a rea was commercial a nd industrial and during cross -examination he told the same boundaries of the appellants ’ land as told by the Patwari (PW-1). It appears tha t at the trial, the Reference Court thought fit to ascertain the nature and use of the land thr ough local investigation and in furtherance of this object issued a commission to Abdul Majeed Kausar , Advocate (CW-1) directing him to make an investigation and to rep ort the reon.

[30] This approach w as very pertinent, a nd we would like to emphasize here that in such like cases the Court should bear in mind that under Article 24 of our Constitution , the land owner has a fundamental right to get fair and just compensat ion for the lan d acquired, an d must, therefore, Province of Pun jab th rough Land Acquisition Co llector and another v.

[31] Begum Aziza [2014 SCMR 75] 6 Hafiz Tassaduq Hussain v. Lal Kh atoon and others [PLD 2011 SC 296] Farzand Ali and another v. Khuda Bakhsh and others [PLD 2015 SC 187] C.A.No.914 -L of 2013.doc - 9 - take all possible steps to protect the landowner from denial of that right, and to do so the law does not restrict it to merely rely on the evidence of the parties , but obliges it to exercise its suo motu powers under Ord er XXVI, Rule 9 CPC and , to obtain the Commission ’s report on the matters relating to the location , type and use of the land acquired and its market value.

[32] We see that in the present case to fulfil the above dictates of a fair trial, and for the com pliance o f the order of the Court, the Commission visited the site, prepared a site plan, recorded the statement of the parties and witnesses, and prepared his report stating that the land of the appellant s was of very valuable and commercial nature and situated in the fac tory area.

[33] The Local Commissioner retur ned his report (Ex. C-1) and the evidence (Ex.C -2) taken by him to the Court appearing as CW-1. Needless to state here that per Order XXVI Rule 10 CPC the report of the Commissioner together w ith the evidence recorded by him was evidence in the suit and formed part of the record.

[34] There is also no denying that Commissioner ’s integrity and carefulness was unquestioned , his careful and laborious execution of task was proved by his report, and h e had not blindly a dopted the assertion of either party, and thus, it was not sa fe for the Court to disregard it or inte rfere with th e result of a careful local investi gation as to the use and location of the land acquired .7 That being so and considering th at the said evide nce having gone unrebutted from the respondent ’s side, the same is sufficient on the strength of which we can justifiably return our findings that th e observation o f the Division Bench of the High Court that the appellants could not prove that th eir land was itself 7 Chadan Mull Indra Kumar and others v.

[35] Chiman Lal Girdhar Das Par ekh and another [AIR 1940 PC 3] C.A.No.914 -L of 2013.doc - 10 - commercial, was not correct, for, it escaped its c onsideration that the land could not be assessed by reference to its use at the time of acquisition but by reference to the possible use in future. This means that the landowner cannot be punished for not using the land in a certain way.

[36] We would, therefor e, hold that notwithstanding the absence of evidence regarding the use of land at the time of acquisition, it had become commercial by virtue of being situated in a commercial area. 9. We may now cons ider what should be the proper compensa tion for the appellants ’ land. We find that notices (Ex.A.5) u nder section 9 of the Act were issued to the ap pellants, and pursuant thereto, they appeared before the LAC and stated that their land wa s of commercial/industrial kind and demanded compensation at the rate of Rs.70,000/ - per marl a, but on the contrar y, the LAC considered their land as agricultural and fixed the compensation at Rs.1200/ - per marla.

[37] It would be apposite to state here that i n the circumstances we cannot rely on the report (Ex.C -1) of the Commission which states that the value of the appellants ’ land at the time of acquisition was Rs.125,000/ - per marla because section 25(1) of the Act provides that the amount awarded t o the landowner by the Court sh all not exceed the amount so claimed, meaning thereby, the amount to be awarded to the appellant cannot exceed Rs.70,000/ - per marla .8 Since , in the presen t case, we have come t o the conclusion that the appellants ’ land was of a co mmercial nature, the comp ensation has to be determined accordingly , and about this, our attention has been 8 Hyderabad Development Authority and another v.

[38] Karam Khan Shoro [1985 SCMR 45] Land Acquisitio n Officer and Assistant Commissioner, Hyderabad v. Gul Muhammad th rough legal heirs [PLD 2005 SC 311] C.A.No.914 -L of 2013.doc - 11 - drawn to the letter No.1039- -S-IV dat ed 8th of January , 1996 of the Board of Rev enue, Punjab (Ex.A.8), in which the rate of commercial la nd of village Baddo has been fixed at Rs.40,000/ - per marla.

[39] There is no thing on record nor was it submitted during the arguments that anyone was paid more than Rs.40,000/ - per marla for the commercial land of Baddo vill age, so balancing the interest of the appe llants wit h the publi c interest , we are satisfied that the same rate should be for the land of the appellants, and we accordingly fix it as doing so would also give equal treatment to the landowners of commercial land acquir ed. 10.

[40] Accordingly, we a llow th is appeal in part and enhance the compensation awarded from Rs.1200/ - per marl a to Rs.40,000/ - per marla. The appellants will be entitled to all statutory benefits as already a warded by the Lahore High Court . The judgment and decree dated 8th of October , 2013 issued by the Divis ion Bench of the Lahore High Court are hereby modified in the above terms.

[41] There shall be no orde r as to costs. 11. Above are the reasons of our short order of e ven date . JUDGE ISLAMABAD 29.11.2022 APPROVED FOR R EPORTING JUDGE *Hashmi * JUDGE