Case No: C.A.1189/2014
Case Title: Habib Bank Ltd v. Gulzar Khan & others
Subject: Service/Reinstatement
Judge: MR. JUSTICE GULZAR AHMED
Judgment Date: 11-04-2019
Upload Date: 13-07-2019
Citations: 2019 SCMR 946
SC Citations: 2019 SCP 157
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/C.A._1189_2014.pdf

[1] Judgment dated 19.03.2014 passed by the Lahore High Court, Lahore , in W.P.No.21698 of 2011 ] Habib Bank Limited …Appellant (s) Versus Gulzar Khan & others …Respondent(s) For the Appellant (s) : Mr. Faisal Mehmood Ghani, ASC For the Respondent(s) : Mr. Zulfiqar Khalid Maluka, ASC Date of Hearing : 11.04.2019 JUDGMENT GULZAR AHMED , J.— This appeal is by leave of the Court dated 10.09.2014 .

[2] Brief facts of the matter are that respondent No.1 (the respondent ), who was working as an Officer Grade -II (OG-II) and Manager HBL , Sharif abad Branch , District Jhang, allegedly mishandled the bank funds. Show -cause notice was issued to the respondent, who filed its reply. Thereafter , a regular inquiry was conducted against the respondent in which he was found guilty of the commission of said offence .

[3] Second sh ow-cause notice dated 20.11.2006 was issued to the respondent and thereafter vide letter dated 26.06.2007, a major penalty of compulsory retirement from service was imposed on him . The r espondent then filed Grievance Petition in Punjab Labour Court No.5, Sargod ha Camp at Jhang , praying for his reinstatement with all back benefits.

[4] The appellant C.A.No.1189 of 2014.doc - 2 - contested the said Grievance Petition of the respondent by filing its written statement in which one of the objections taken was about the maintainability of the Grievance P etition on the basis that he was not a ‘workman ’ for that he was employed as OG -II and Manager of the branch .

[5] The Labour Court, after full trial, vide its order dated 23.02.2009 allowed Grievance Petition filed by the respondent. On appeal, the Punjab La bour Appellate Tribunal (the Tribunal ), after hearing both parties , allowed the appeal vide judgment dated 08.07.2011 , by setting aside the order of the Labour Court.

[6] The respondent , however, challenged judgment of the Tribunal by filing Writ Pe tition No.21 698 of 2011 before the Lahore High Court, Lahore . Such Writ Petition of the respondent was dismissed in limine vide order dated 30.09.2011 passed by the learned Judge in Chamber s of the Lahore High Court, Lahore.

[7] The respondent approached thi s Court by f iling Civil Petition No.1965 -L of 2011 , where in order dated 20.12.2012 was passed remanding the Writ Petition to the High Court for decision afresh. Pursuant to the remand order, the learned Judge in Chamber of the Lahore High Court , Lahore , passed the im pugned order dated 19.03.2014 and while allowing the Writ Petition of the respondent the matter was remanded to the Tribunal for decision of the controversy on merit s. 2.

[8] Mr. Faisal Mehmood Ghani, learned ASC for the appellant, at the outset , has contended that the Tribunal in its judgment has considered all relevant evidence as well as the case law and thereafter concluded that the respondent was not a ‘workman ’ and thus the order of the Labour Court was set -aside.

[9] C.A.No.1189 of 2014.doc - 3 - He further contended that the High Court , in the impugned judgment , has dealt with the question of respondent being a ‘workman ’ or not , and has given a finding that he is a ‘workman ’. He next contended that the evidence , on record , amply demonstrate d that the respondent, who was employed as OG -II and Manager of the branch was not a ‘workman ’ and thus the Labour Court could not have exercised jurisdiction of entertaining his Grievance Petition .

[10] He contended that the High Court , by way of impugned judgment, had misread the evidence available on record so al so the legal position pronounced by this Court and have thus reached the conclusion that the respondent is a ‘workman ’, which is not sustainable by law. 3. Mr. Zulfiqar Khalid Maluka, learned ASC , on the other hand, has contended that by the impugned judg ment the High Court has merely remanded the matter to the Tribunal and thus the remand order could not have been challenged by the appellant.

[11] He conceded that the High Court while remanding the ma tter, by the impugned judgment , has given a specific finding t hat the respondent is a ‘workman ’ and thus his Grievance Petition before the Labour Court was maintainable and the matter was remanded only for decision on merits by the Tribunal. Learned ASC further contended that the evidenc e on record so also the legal position amply established that the respondent was a ‘workman ’ and in this regard supported the impugned judgment of the High Court. 4.

[12] We have considered the submissions of learned ASC for the parties and have also gone thro ugh the record with their assistance. The foremost question is as to whether jurisdiction C.A.No.1189 of 2014.doc - 4 - was available to the Labour Court to adjudicate and decide the matter and once it is established that the Labour Court had the jurisdiction , then the Labour Appeal before the Tribunal, as a consequence, would be maintainable and decided on its own merit s.

[13] The h istory of this case shows that the Labour Court has already dealt with the matter at full length and pass ed its order. Thereafter, the matter has been dealt with by the Tribunal , the High Court and then by this Court , when it was remanded to the High Court to decide the Writ Petition filed by the respondent afresh.

[14] In our view, where this Court , while remanding the matter to the High Court , has directed to d ecide the matter afresh, perhaps such direction of this Court did not provide enough room to the High Court to further remand the matter to the Tribunal for deciding the same on merit s. In our vi ew, in terms of the order passed by this Court, the High Cou rt ought to have decided the case afresh not only on the point of jurisdiction but also on merit s.

[15] Be that as it may, as the High Court has decided only the question of jurisdiction of the Labour Cour t by determining the respondent to be a ‘workman ’, so we are mainly concerned with this question , which has been elaborately argued by the learned ASC appearing for the parties. So far as the evidence available on record is concerned, we have noted that th e respondent has recorded his evidence as PW -1 before the Labour Court where he admitted that on 01.07.2005 he was promoted as OG -II by the appellant and that he worked as Manager of Sharifa bad branch of the appellant -bank for one year and three months .

[16] He also admitted that he was drawing a salary of Rs.18, 324/- plus other allowances, as C.A.No.1189 of 2014.doc - 5 - admissible to him. He further admitted, in his evidence, that his duty included issuing of draft s, issuing of cheque s, opening of account s, closing of cash with signature of second officer , depositing of cash in the strong room and locking the same.

[17] Such admission by the respondent, in his evidence, amply demonstrate d that the nature of work being performed by the respondent as OG - II and Manager of the branch was not of a clerical nature and did not fall within the ambit of term ‘workman ’ as defined in the Industrial and Commercial Employment (Standing Order s) Ordinance, 1968 so also under the Industrial Relations Ordinance , 2002.

[18] It is not necessary for us to give he re the defin ition of the term ‘workman’ in these t wo laws for that besides the evidence available on record, the legal aspect is also clinched by various judgments pronounced by this Court in relation to the bank employees, who were employed as OG -II and Manager of the branch.

[19] We may note that though the respon dent did not ha ve Powe r of Attorney with him , he was still Manager of the branch and all affairs of the branch were under his management and control , even the entire cash and record of the bank relating to the branch as well as all communication s of the br anch were also under hi s supervision , upon which he was required to take decision s as to how the same has to be dealt with in the best interest of the appellant -bank.

[20] The term ‘Manager’ even otherwise is defined in the Black’s Law Dictionary, 9th Edition, as follows: “A person who administers or supervises the affairs of a business, office, or other organization” 5. Learned ASC for the appellant has cited a number of cases on the point as to whether the respondent being OG-II and C.A.No.1189 of 2014.doc - 6 - Manager of the branch co uld be considered as a ‘workman ’ and in this regard has referred to the case of National Bank of Pakistan v.

[21] Punjab Labour court No.5, Faisalabad & 2 others [1993 SCMR 672] , where this Court dealt with the case of OG -II of the National Bank of Pakistan, wh o had filed Grievance P etition before the Labour Court . The bank has taken an objection that OG -II was not a ‘workman ’ as he was predominantly performing managerial and administrative work.

[22] This Court deal t with the issue as follows : “11. … … Admittedly , respondent No.3 was dr awing, according to his own show ing, salary o f Rs.1,150 per month. He was an officer of Grade -II and, therefore, if he was employed at the relevant time in a superviso ry capacity not necessarily mainly in a managerial or administrat ive capacity, he would fall within the first category of clause (b) referred to hereinabove .

[23] It is a well -settled propos ition of law that a person who approaches a Court on the basis of averment that he is a workman wit hin the definition of clause ( xxviii) of section 2 of the I RO, the burden of pro of lies on him and not on the employer . In the present case as pointed out hereinabove, the Labour Court has no t examined the above question, but the Tribunal relied upon the statement of respondent No.3 in his examination -in-chief to the effect that “I was Second Officer in the branch when I was dismissed.

[24] I was not Manager at the relevant time. My job was of c lerical nat ure. I was not entrusted with managerial or superviso ry job.” The Tribunal was also influenced by the factum that no cross -examination was directed in this regard. In our view, simpliciter statement of respondent No.3 tha t “I was not performing supervisory job ”, but at the same time, admitting the factum t hat he was Grade -II Officer, was not sufficient for dischar ging the above burden of proof .

[25] The Tribunal as well as the learned Judge in chamber wrongly placed burden of pro of on the appellant by holding that they had failed to produce the evidence to show the duties of respondent No.3. In our view, it was for respondent No.3 to have stated what were the d uties of a Grade -II Officer . It is also incorrect to conclude that the appellant had not directed an y cross -examination on the above question.

[26] In the c ross-examination, it was suggested that respondent No.3 was perform ing the duties of Manager, which suggestion was denied by him. ” After examining the case law on the point , this Court ultimately reached at the following conclusion: “15. … … The question, whether a person is a workman withi n the purview of clause (xxviii) of section 2 of the IRO , can be determined not on the basis of the designation of his C.A.No.1189 of 2014.doc - 7 - post, but on the ba sis of the duties which he was perfo rming.

[27] In the present case, we hav e already held that burden of proof that respon dent No.3 was a wo rkman , wa s on him, which he failed to discharge .” Further , in the case of National Bank of Pakistan & another v. Anwar Shah & others [2015 SCMR 434] , this Court w as confronted with the question as to whether OG-I, OG-II and OG-III were workmen and could become membe rs of the employee ’s union and participate in such uni on election process, and observed as follows: “8. … … The 'worker' and the 'workman' defined in the Act mean person not falling within the definition of 'employer' who is e mployed as a supervisor or as an apprentice but does not include a person who is employed mainly in managerial or administrative capacity.

[28] On the other hand, the 'employer' as defined in the Act includes a person who is proprietor, director, manager, secre tary, agent or officer or person concerned with the management of the affairs of the establishment. The term 'officer' is specifically mentioned in the definition of term 'employer'. However, as has been noted from the case -law cited by the learned counsel for the parties, the Courts hav e not considered the designation of a person to be a factor determining his status of employment in an establishment to be that of an officer or a workman rather the Court has always considered the nature of duties and funct ions of a person to be the facto r which will determine his status as to whether he is a workman or not.

[29] In this respect, we may refer to the case of National Bank of Pakistan v. Pun jab Labour Court No.5, Faisalabad (1993 SCMR 672), which was a case relatin g to an Officer Grade -I1 of NBP against whom disciplinary action was taken. He approached the Labour Court for redressal of his grievance claiming himself to be a workman.

[30] The matter came up to this Court and it was held that the designation per se is not determinative of a person be ing a workman rather the nature of duties and functi on determine his status and the burden is on him to establish that he is a workman. As the Officer Grade -II failed to discharge his burden, he was held not to be a 'workman' and his grievance petition was dis missed.

[31] The ratio of this case and also of the o ther cases that have been relied upon by the learned counsel for the parties is that the person who approaches a Labour Court for redressal of his grievance claiming himself to be a workman and such status of workman being denied by the employer, it become s a bounden duty of a person who approaches the Labour forum to demonstrate through evidence that his nature of duties and functions were that of a workman and not that of a managerial or administrative capac ity and that he was not an employer.

[32] Unless such categoric evidence is led by him, he will not be considered to be a workman and his grievance petition will not be maintainable before the Labour forum. It, C.A.No.1189 of 2014.doc - 8 - therefore, implies that the officer cannot be assu med to be workmen nor such can be declared on me re asking.

[33] The argument that officers Grade -I to III are performing supervisory function in itself means that this has to be established by evidence. In this view of the matter, on a solitary claim of the uni on no blanket declaration can be given that the Officers Grade -I to III in the establishment of NBP are workmen. ” Moreover, in the case of Muslim Commercial Bank Ltd. and others v.

[34] Muhammad Shahid Mumtaz and another [2011 SC MR 1475 ] = [2009 PLC 281 ] this Court has d ealt with the issue as follows: “7. In the light of the above d efinition, we need to examine as to whether the respondent was a workman or not. Before discussing the factual aspects of the question , we may point out that both the Courts erred in placing burden on the Bank to provide that the respondent was not a workman .

[35] This Court has already held in the case of National Bank of Pakistan v . Punjab Labour Court No .5 (supra) that a person, who approaches a Court on the basis of averment that he is a workman, the burden of proof li es on him and not on the employer. The respondent, was a Manager at the relevant time of the Khakwani Cloth Market Branch of the appellant - Bank.

[36] This was his second posting as Manager as he has earlier posted in the same capacity in Khiali Gate Branch, MCB , Gujranwala. The power of attorney was executed by the Bank in his favour on 20th August, 1996, four years prior to the present incident. This power of attorney was given to him on his fir st posting as Manager.

[37] It was d uly notarized by a Notary Public and signed by the President of the Bank and attested by two Vice -Presidents of the Bank. There is no reason to doubt its authenticity and we are unable to understand as to how the trial Court had ruled out of consider the p ower simply on the ground that there was no evidence to show that the same was ever delivered to the respondent.

[38] In view of its notarization and execution by the most responsible official of the Bank, in the absence of any convincing evidence to the contra ry, it is unbelievable that the same would have been fabricated only to counter the respondent's claim of being the workman. We have also noticed that this aspect was not discussed by the learned Judge in Chambers in the High Court. 8.

[39] The powers conferred on th e respondent by the power of attorney are material for fixing his status in the context as to whether or not he was a workman. For this purpose , all the p owers conferred are relevant but the most sig nificant ones are t he followin g:-- (2) To engage, employee, control and dismiss Clerks, Servants and others whether engaged by the said Attorney or by the Bank or otherwise. (4) To settle and adjust all average and other losses and claims under Policies of Insurance of A ll kinds and all other accounts a nd reckonings wh atsoever and to compromise and compound all debts and claims whatsoever claimable by the Bank and to submit to Arbitration all C.A.No.1189 of 2014.doc - 9 - differences and disputes whatsoever. (6) To take on lease or other ten ancy any la nd, houses, buildings for the p urposes of officers or p remises suitably for carrying on the said business or any of them and to bu ild, alter and furnish any office, house or premises. (8) To make, sign, seal, execu te, deliver and endorse all receipts, dee ds, redemption of mortgage deed s, conveyance, transfers and instruments. (12) To draw , accept, endorse , sign and negotiate all Bills of Exchange, Divid end Warrants and any orders for payment of money in which the Bank is or may be interested or concerned and to which its endorsement or signature may be necessary or requisite. (17) AND GENERALLY to do all su ch acts, deeds and things not specifically mentioned hereinabove but which are necessary or expedient to carry on and manage the business of the Bank a nd all such other acts which are incidental to the promotion of Banking bus iness .” 9.

[40] The above powers, particularly the one of hire and fire in para 2, sufficiently demonstrates the nature of his duties and functions as managerial and supervisory and not clerical in nature, as claimed by him. ” Again , in the case of Javaid Hussain Naqi v. Member B oard of Directors, MCB and others [2009 PLC 260 ], this Court was confronted with the question as to whether the Branch Manager of the Bank could fall within the term ‘workman’ as defined under the labour laws .

[41] Such question was dealt with by this Court as follows: - “3. The pres ent petitioner also is a Branch Manager of Muslim Comm ercial Bank, performing the duties of managerial and supervisory nature. It is not in the last Branch alone but, acc ording to para. No.3 of his grievance petition (pp.65), he has all along been working as Branch Manager at different stations since November , 1979.

[42] Learned High Court was, therefore, justified in holding, in the light of the above referred judgment of this Court, that the petitioner was not a "workman"' and hence the Labour Court lacked jurisdiction to entertain his petition under section 25 -A of the Industrial Relations Ordinance, 1969. 4. The arguments of the learned couns el that the branch in which the p etitioner was last posted, was a small branch, is altogether out of context.

[43] The size o f a branch has no nexus with the nature of duties o f the Manager, which always remain of managerial and supervisory nature. It would be ridiculous to observe that the Ma nager of a large branch would not be a "workman" and that of a small branch would be. T here being no force in the petition, it is hereby d ismissed and leave to appeal refused. ” C.A.No.1189 of 2014.doc - 10 - 6.

[44] On the other hand, learned ASC for the res pondent has refereed to the case of Mahmood Hussain Larik and others v. Muslim Commercial Bank Limited [2009 SCMR 857]. This case was heard by a three -member bench of this Court where two of the members who were in majority, inter alia , dealt with the que stion as to whether OG -III in the bank could be considered as a ‘workman ’ or not and came to the conclusion that such officer s, in view of the nature of work performed by them were not ‘workman ’.

[45] However, his lordship Sabihuddin Ahmed, J. , one of the memb ers of the said bench gave his di ssenting note . Learned ASC for the respondent has relied upon this dissenting note to support his case. Reliance of the learned ASC for the respondent on th e dissenting note against the majority view , cannot give a foundat ion to this Court to base its de cision in considering as to what was the decision of this Court in the ca se, the Court will always consider the majority view that prevailed in the case and not the dissenting note given by one of the judges of the b ench.

[46] This is well established law and it is unnecessary to cite any precedent for it . 7. The very evidence which the respondent recorded before the La bour Court, as read by us, did not refer to any function of the respondent that could be considered to be mainl y of manual or clerical nature rather the functions which he performed and also stated in his evidence were of OG -II and Manager of the branch and those were mainly of managerial and supervisory nature and under no circumstance could they be considered t o be that of a ‘workman ’ more particularly, when the respondent in his evidence has stated that he was issuing drafts and cheques , C.A.No.1189 of 2014.doc - 11 - opening of accounts, closing of cash with signature of second officer , depositing of cash in strong room and locking the same are the those which need independent application of mind and making of decisions for that the drafts and cheques are not issued in routine when they are also to be signed .

[47] Similarly, opening of bank account s, depositing of cash in the strong room and locki ng the same are the functions which are mainly of the Manager and not that of a ‘workman ’. Further , during arguments , provision of Section 9 of the Financial Institutions (Recovery of Finance s) Ordinanc e, 2001 , was also referred to, which provides as follo ws: “9(1) Where a customer or f inancial institution commits a default in fulfilment of any obligation with regard to any finance, the financial institution or, as the case ma y be, the customer, may inst itute a suit in the Banking Cou rt by presenting a plai nt which shall be verified on o ath, in the case of a financial institution by the Branch Manager or such other officer of the financial institution as may be duly authorized in this behalf by power of a ttorney or otherwise”.

[48] This pr ovision shows that the branch Manager of the bank is competen t to file a suit on behalf of the bank and the person, who is authorized by law to file a suit on behalf of a bank in the Court of law could not be considered to be a ‘workman ’. In this regard, referen ce may further b e made to the provision of Rule 1 Order XXIX CPC, which is as follows: “Subscription and verification of pleading : In suits by or against a corporation, any pleading may be signed and verified on behalf of the corporation by the sec retary or by any directo r or other principal officer of the corporation who is able to depose to the facts of the case. ” 8.

[49] The cumulative effect of the evidence available on record , judgments of this Court r eferred to above , the provision of the Financial Insti tutions ( Recover y of Finances) Ordinance, 2001 and Rule 1 Order XXIX CPC amply establish that the respondent , C.A.No.1189 of 2014.doc - 12 - as a n officer OG -II and Manager of the branch , was not a ‘workman ’.

[50] Thus , the Labour Court did not have jurisdiction to entertain his Grievance Petition , which o n this very ground was liable to be dismissed. Having come to conclusion that the Labour Court did not have jurisdiction in the matter, thus , the Tribunal also lack ed jurisdiction to deal with the matt er and , therefore , the very exercise of remanding the case to the Tribunal for deciding the same on merit s will be a futile exercise . 9.

[51] For all the above reasons, we are of the considered view that the impugned judgment was not in consonance with t he evidence available on record , the law prono unced by this Court and other legal provision s cited abo ve, thus the same is not sustainable. Consequently, the appeal is allowed and the impugned judgment dated 19.03.2014 passed by the High Court is set-aside.

[52] JUDGE Bench -II ISLAMABAD 11.04.2019 APPROVED FO R REPORTING JUDGE *Hashmi * JUDGE C.A.No.1189 of 2014.doc - 13 - In the very evidence which t he respondent recorded before the Labour Court, as read by us, did n ot at all refer to the work that he actually performed in that Bank as OG-II and Manager of the branch was predominantly of manual or cle rical nature, which is the requirement under the law for holding a person to be as ‘workman ’ rather as noted above, the function that he has admitted to be performing as OG -II and branch Ma nager predominantly shows that he was perform ing wo rk that of an officer and manager which under no circumstance to be considered to that of a ‘workman ’.