Case No: C.A.1011/2024
Case Title: M/s Options International (SMC-Pvt.) Ltd thr. its CEO v. The Competition Commission of Pakistan through its Registrar & another
Subject: Monopoly Control Authority/Fine Imposed Under Competition Act 2010
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa
Judgment Date: 07-08-2024
Upload Date: 09-08-2024
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2024 SCP 260
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.a._1011_2024.pdf

[1] judgment dated 29.05.2024 of the Competition Appel late Tribunal, Islamabad passed in Appeal No.  3) M/s Options International (SMC -Pvt.) Ltd through its CEO Appellant Versus The Competition Commission of Pakistan through its Registrar and another Respondents For the Appellant: Mr. Taimoor Aslam Khan, ASC For Respondent No. 1: Mr.

[2] Hafiz Naeem, Legal Advisor For Respondent No. 2: Not represented Date of Hearing: 07.08.2024 ORDER Qazi Faez Isa, CJ . This appeal has been filed under section 44 of the Competition Act , 2010 (‘the Act’) against the judgment dated 29 May 2024 passed by the Competition Appellate Tribunal, Islamabad (‘the Tribunal ’).

[3] The judgment of the Tribunal is unanimous ; two learned Members agreeing with the learned Chairperson. 2. The Competition Commission of Pakistan (‘the Commission ’) had impose d a penalty of five million rupees on the appellant and order ed further additional penalty of one hundred thousand rupees per day from the date of passing of the order in case of non -compliance . 3.

[4] The appellant had assailed b efore the Tribunal the above order dated 19 December 2018 passed by the Commission . The Tribunal decided the appeal by enhancing the penalty amount from five million to six million rupees but reduc ed the per day penalty amount to five thousand rupees from one hundred thousand rupees with effect from 3 December 2021, which was the date from which the Tribunal had become functional.

[5] We inquired from learned counsel which judgment , whether of CA No. 1011 of 2024 2 the Commission or the Tribunal, favour s the appellant , and he stated that the one of the Tribuna l. 4. We also inquired from the learned counsel whether the appellant disputes that the name Starbucks and logo are registered trademarks , and he conceded that both the said name and logo are registered abroad and in Pakistan.

[6] The matter befor e the Commission , and th en before the Tribunal , was with regard to the use of the Starbucks name and logo by the appellant and selling its produc ts under such name and style . A complaint from the proprietor of the said tradename and trademar k, Starbucks Corporation USA (respondent No. 2) , was received by the Commission which took action on it, and passed the abovementioned order . 5.

[7] The l earned counsel conten ded that the Act only applies to ‘undertaking s and all actions or matters that take p lace in Pakistan and distort competition within Pakistan ’, as stipulated in sub -section (3) of section 1 of the Act. However, he submitted, since the respondent No. 2 does not have any outlet in Pakistan , nor has authori zed anyone to use its name, logo and product s in Pakistan , therefore , the appellant was not in competition with the respondent No. 2, its authorized user (s) and/or its products. 6.

[8] We cannot bring ourselves to agree wit h the said submission, which has no substance . The appellant ha d put itse lf forward by selling its own products under the international brand name Starbucks and by using its logo, which must have had the effect of distorting competition within Pakistan because a local vendor selling similar products , as those being sold by the appellant , would be at a serious disadvantage and not able to compet e therewith since the unsuspect ing public would believe, understand or perceive the same to be the genuine product s of the respondent No. 2 . 7.

[9] The learned counsel then objected to the lev y of the said penalties. We inquired from the learned counsel whether the law authorizes the penalties which ha d been imposed and he conceded that it d id under CA No. 1011 of 2024 3 section 38 of the Act . Therefore, it is not understandable how the same can be objected to. 8.

[10] No other point has been urged which may persuade us to take a view different from the one taken by the Tribunal. Therefore, this appeal is dismisse d, but with no order as t o costs as the respondent No. 2 did not enter appearance . Copy of this order be sent to the respondent No. 2 for information .