Case No: C.A.321-L/2014
Case Title: Ch.Muhammad Yousaf Kaselia v. Peer Ghulam Mohy-ud-Din Chishti, etc
Subject: Election/of Provincial Assembly
Judge: MR. JUSTICE FAISAL ARAB
Judgment Date: 16-05-2016
Upload Date: 14-07-2016
Citations: PLD 2016 SC 689
SC Citations: 2016 SCP 110
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/C.A._321-L_2014.pdf

[1] judgment dated 30.9.2014 passed by the Elec tion Tribunal, Multan in Election Petition No. ECP,  ETM) Ch. Muhammad Yousaf Kaselia … Appellant VERSUS Peer Ghulam Mohy -ud-Din Chishti, etc …Respondents For the Appellant: Mr. Muhammad Shahzad Shaukat, ASC Barrist er Jehanzeb Raheem, ASC For the Respondent (1): Syed Najmul Hassan Kazmi, Sr.

[2] ASC Mr. M.S. Khattak, AOR. For Respondents (2 -4): Ex-parte Date of Hearing: 16.05.2016 JUDGMENT FAISAL ARAB, J. - In the General Elections that were held on 11.5 .2013, the appellant and the respondent No. 1 were the main contesting candidates f rom the Provincial Assembly constituency No. PP -232 Vehari -I.

[3] The appellant secured 50350 votes and was declared returned candidate , whereas the respondent No. 1 was runner -up who secured 43751 votes. The respondent No. 1 filed Election Petition before the Election Tribunal , Multan under Section 52 of the Representation of the People Act, 1976 alleging corrupt and illegal prac tices on the part of the appellant .

[4] It was alleged that the Civil Appeal No. 321 -L- of 2014 2 appellant won the elections by influencing the election staff . Additionally , it was also alleged that in his nomination form , the appellant submitted false statements of election campaign expenses as well as of his assets and liabilities .

[5] The Ele ction Tribunal vide impugned judgment accepted the election petition after holding that the appellant had filed false statements of election campaign expenses and did not di sclos e certain liabilities . The election of the appellant was declared void and fresh election in the constituency was ordered .

[6] Aggrieved by such decision the present appeal has been filed. 2. In his nomination form , the appellant disclosed that he owns a business, which is being run in the name of ‘Younas Brothers Cotton Ginning and Oil Factory ’ and showed his investment therein to the extent of 6.3 million rupees . In the nomination form under the item where liabilities of bank loans were to be stated, no disclosure was made.

[7] It was only in the evidence it surfaced that the appella nt had mortgaged his property to obtain loan for the running of his business. An officer of the bank from which loan was obtained appeared as the appellant’s witness . He stated that upto 30.6.2013 financial facility to the tune of 70 million rupees was ava iled from the bank by Younas Brothers Cotton Ginning and Oil Factory .

[8] From this, it is clearly evident that a financial liability of 70 million rupees was incurred and secured by creating mortgage on immovable property owned by the appellant . Admittedly , the appellant was one of the signatories to the mortgage deed but he failed to disclose this liability incurred upon himself in his nomination form.

[9] Civil Appeal No. 321 -L- of 2014 3 3. Learned counsel for the appellant argued that the loan that was obtained from the bank for the joint fa mily business had not become due for payment on 30.06.2012 , therefore , the provisions of Section 12 (f) of the Representation of the People Act, 1976 , which require a candidate to file statement of his assets and liabilities and those of his spouse and dep endents are to be read with the provisions of Section 12(c) of the said Act which requires submission of a declaration that no loan for an amount of two million rupees or more, obtained from any bank, financial institution, cooperative society or corporate body in his own name or in the name of his spouse or any of his dependents, or any business concern mainly owned by him or the aforesaid, remains unpaid for more than one year from the due date, or that he has got such loan written off .

[10] He submitted that in the present case, firstly, the loan of 70 million was not even due on the requisite date and secondly the appellant h olds only 1/8th share in the said business so it was not mainly owned by the appellant , therefore penal consequence for such non -disclos ure ought not to have followed. 4.

[11] As to the non -disclosure of election campaign expenses, learned counsel explained that certain expenses of election meetings are borne by friends and the people of the area who invite the candidate and it is not within the domain of the candidate to account for it. He submitted that the Election Tribunal non -seated the appellant after finding an expenditure of only Rs.50,000/ - in excess of the permissible limited prescribed under the election laws which being a very harsh decision is liable to be set -aside on that score .

[12] Civil Appeal No. 321 -L- of 2014 4 5. It is of utmost importance that a contesting candidate must disclose the assets that he owns and the liabilities that he owes in his nomination form. The disclosure of liabilities is more important that disclosure of assets. It is important for the reason that while holding public office , in case the liability incurred prior to the election is liquidated, he could be called upon to explain the source from which the liability was liquidated ; that is , whether the same was liquidated from his personal sources of income or that he had misused the authority of the public office in any manner that contributed to the liquidation of the liability .

[13] Therefore , non- disclosure of any liability is to be met with p enal action in the same manner as non -disclosure of any asset . We are not impressed by the argument of the appellant’s counsel that provisions of sub -section (f) of Section 12 of the Representation of the People Act, 1976 are to be read with sub -section (c ) of section 12 of the said Act.

[14] Sub-section (c) of Section 12 speaks about disclosures, either of any write off or of default that remains unpaid for more than a year, of any financial obligation towards a bank, financial institution, co -operative society or corporate body whereas sub -section (f) speaks about disclosure of assets and liabilities.

[15] A financial liabilit y cannot be equated with default committed with regard to any financial obligation . A financial liability is incurred the moment an obligation is created to discharge the same , which by efflux of time either has already become due or is to fall due sometime in future. Therefore, irrespective of any default relating to a financial obligation, liability gets created the moment a person takes upon himself the obligation to settle the same in future.

[16] In the present case , a financial obligation of 70 million rupees towards a bank did exist at the time of filing of the nomination form Civil Appeal No. 321 -L- of 2014 5 which ought to have been disclosed by the appellant irrespective of the fact that the same had not become due but he failed to do so , thereby incurring the penal consequences of non -disclosure . 6.

[17] As to the excessive election campaign expenses , the same being only to the extent of Rs. 30,500/- over and above the perm issible limit , which being not a significant amount, the same ought not to have been made basis for declaring appellant ’s election as void. 7. We are , therefore , of the view that the Election Tribunal rightly non -seated the appellant on account of his failure to disclos e in the nomination form his financial obligation of 70 million rupees which he secured by executing a mortgage deed . 8.

[18] This appeal was dismissed vide short order dated 16.05.2016 and these are the reasons for the same. CHIEF JUST ICE JUDGE JUDGE Islamabad, the 16th of May, 2016 Approved For Reporting Khurram Civil Appeal No. 321 -L- of 2014 6 Reproduction 12. Nomination for election. — (2) Every nomination shall be made by a separate nomination paper in the prescribed form which shall be signed both by the proposer and the seconder and shall, on solemn affirmation made and signed by the candidate, accompany — (a) a declaration that he has consented to the nomination and that he fulfils the qualifications specified in Article 62 and is not subject to any of the disqualifications specified in Article 63 or any other law for the time being in force for being elected as a member; (b) Omitted (c) a declaration that no loan for an amount of two million rupees or more, obtained from any bank, financial institutio n, cooperative society or corporate body in his own name or in the name of his spouse or any of his dependents, or any business concern mainly owned by him or the aforesaid, stands unpaid for more than one year from the due date, or has got such loan writt en off; (d) a declaration that he, his spouse or any of his dependents or a business concern mainly owned by him or the aforesaid, is not in default in payment of government dues or utility charges, including telephone, electricity, gas and water charges of an amount in excess of ten thousand rupees, for over six months, at the time of filing of nomination papers; (e) a statement specifying his educational qualifications, occupation, National Identity Card number and National Tax Number, if any, alongwith attested copies thereof; and (f) a statement of his assets and liabilities and those of his spouse and dependents on the prescribed form as on the preceding thirtieth day of June; 48.

[19] Definitions. —For the purpose of this Act, “election expenses” means any expenditure incurred before, during and after an election or payment made, whether by way of gift, loan, advance, deposit or otherwise, for the arrangement, conduct or benefit of, or in connection with or incidental to the election of a candidate, including the expenditure on account of issuing circulars or publications, but does not include the deposit made under section 13. 49.

[20] Restriction on election expenses. —(1) No person other than the candidate shall incur any election expenses of such candidate : Provided that where any person incurs any election expenses on behalf of such candidate, whether for stationery, postage, telegrams, advertisement, transport or for any other item whatsoever, such expenses shall be deemed to be the election expenses inc urred by the candidate himself.