Case No: C.A.936/2012
Case Title: Muhammad Ramzan & others v. Member (Judicial-II) Board of Revenue, Punjab, Lahore & others
Subject: Allotment/of House
Judge: Mr. Justice Amin-Ud-Din Khan
Judgment Date: 16-09-2024
Upload Date: 18-09-2024
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2024 SCP 314
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.a._936_2012.pdf

[1] judgment authored by Mr. Justice Amin-ud-Din Khan with the concurrence of Mr. Justice Yahya Afridi. However, I disagree with the reasoning and conclusion given therein, hence, the instant dissent. 2. These Civil Appeals impugn the same judgment of the Lahore High Court, Lahore (High Court) dated 02.07.2010 (Impugned Judgment).

[2] The Appellants in all these appeals are Adna Maliks and Ala-khud-Adna Maliks who are seeking implementation of MLR 641 read with the 1960 Notification2 with respect to proprietary rights in the Shamlat Deh.3 The Respondents in these appeals are Ala Maliks and they seek the protection of their superior rights as Ala Maliks in the said Deh.

[3] The dispute between the parties is, therefore, with respect to the rights of Ala Maliks and Adna Maliks in the Shamlat Deh. 3. The Appellants are Adna Maliks who hold possession over land in the Shamlat Deh. They challenged mutation entries and orders of the revenue officers whereby the land in their possession was not recorded as under their ownership consequent to MLR 64.

[4] The case of Adna Maliks is based on the implementation of the High Court judgment dated 29.07.19904 (1990 HC Judgment) and the Supreme Court judgment dated 01.04.1991 (1991 SC Judgment) wherein they claim their rights as Adna Maliks having possession in the Shamlat Deh has been recognized and upheld in terms of MLR 64 and 1960 Notification.

[5] The Respondents are Ala Maliks, who claim a superior right in the Shamlat Deh on the basis of their proprietary rights in the village, meaning that, they claim proportionate ownership in the Shamlat Deh according to their proprietorship in the village. They rely on the Hasab Rasad Khewat and the Wajib-ul-Arz to justify their entitlement to proprietary rights in the Shamlat Deh. 4.

[6] This dispute has a longstanding history with multiple rounds of litigation all the way to this Court. In order to appreciate the dispute 1 The West Pakistan Land Reforms Regulation, 1959 (Martial Law Regulation No.64) (MLR 64). 2 Notification No.ASP-202--L.G. dated 03.03.1960 (1960 Notification). 3 Shamlat Deh, Khata No.304 total land consisted of 1,47,000 kanals. 50,686 kanals was acquired by the Thal Development Authority.

[7] The dispute pertains to land measuring 96,314 kanals in Mouza Daggar Aulakh, in Tehsil Bhakkar, District Mianwali. (Shamlat Deh). 4 Judgment by Mr. Munir A. Sheikh, J. in WP Nos.5168 & 5169 of 1983, 1221 of 1969 and 1226 of 1967. Haji Ladhoo v. Member (Revenue), Board of Revenue (Reported as 1991 MLD 99).

[8] CAs.936 of 2012, etc. - 2 - between the parties, relevant facts, by way of background, are as follows: i. The dispute is with respect to the rights of proprietorship in the Shamlat Deh of Daggar Aulakh, District Bhakkar; ii. The concept of Ala Maliks, Ala-khud-Adna Maliks and Adna Maliks was unique to three areas in the Punjab (namely Bhakkar, Muzaffargarh and Layyah).

[9] Ala Maliks were the original settlers and owners of the land, Adna Maliks were cultivators of the land who entered on the land through Ala Maliks and the Ala-khud-Adna Maliks were owners who were in cultivating possession of the land. Basically, the Shamlat Deh is the common land of the village governed by the landowners of the village; iii.

[10] On the basis of the West Pakistan Land Reforms Regulation, MLR 64 was introduced in 1959. Part VI of MLR 64 contains the ‘Abolition of Certain Interests’ and its Paragraph No.22 provided that Ala-Malkiat and similar other interests subsisting immediately before the commencement of this Paragraph, shall on such commencement, stand abolished and no compensation shall be claimed by, or paid to persons affected by the abolition.

[11] To give effect to Paragraph No.22 of MLR 64, the 1960 Notification was issued by the West Pakistan Land Commission (Commission). Clause 6 thereof is relevant which provides that Adna Maliks will be made full proprietors of land held by them and that they are not liable to pay any compensation to the Ala Maliks or the Commission and further that they are no longer required to pay rent or any other dues to the Ala Maliks; iv.

[12] After the promulgation of MLR 64 and issuance of the 1960 Notification, mutation No.1655 was entered in the revenue record on 13.06.1962 by the Assistant Collector-II, Bhakkar (1962 Mutation). A dispute started at this point because this mutation was not based on MLR 64 and the 1960 Notification rather it was CAs.936 of 2012, etc. - 3 - based on customary practice and the Hasab Rasad Khewat, which meant that it was based on the respective shares in the land holdings of the village.

[13] Consequently, the Ala Maliks were recorded as owners in the Shamlat Deh. Hence, the dispute between Ala Maliks and Adna Maliks being a dispute related to proprietary rights in the Shamlat Deh started; v. Adna Maliks challenged the 1962 Mutation before the Collector (Consolidation), who set aside this order, cancelled the mutation, accepted the claim of Adna Maliks and remanded the case to the Assistant Commissioner-II, Bhakkar vide order dated 28.01.1967 to once again determine proprietary rights in the Shamlat Deh on the basis of possession; vi.

[14] The Ala Maliks filed an appeal before the Additional Commissioner (Revenue) which was dismissed vide order dated 28.04.1967 and the order of the Collector (Consolidation) was maintained by upholding the rights of Adna Maliks such that distribution of land in the Shamlat Deh be made on the basis of possession of Adna Maliks, who have now become proprietors of that land; vii.

[15] On remand, the Assistant Collector-II, Bhakkar vide order 01.06.1967 maintained his previous order whereby he did not grant Adna Maliks their proprietary rights on the basis of possession but rather maintained the rights of Ala Maliks on the basis of the Hasab Rasad Khewat Malikan; viii. This order was once again challenged before the Collector, Mianwali who again accepted the appeal of Adna Maliks vide order dated 19.09.1970 and required distribution of the land in the Shamlat Deh on the basis of possession.

[16] The Collector in the said order directed that the rights of Ala Maliks should be extinguished in view of Paragraph No.22 of MLR 64 read with Paragraph No.6(a) of the 1960 Notification and the Shamlat Deh CAs.936 of 2012, etc. - 4 - should be shown in the Jamabandi in the column meant for the proprietors of land being column No.5.

[17] Ala Maliks again filed an appeal against this order before the Commissioner, Sargodha who vide order dated 30.03.1971 dismissed the appeal and maintained the rights of Adna Maliks. In the said order, the Commissioner specifically noted that MLR 64 had been implemented in all khatas 1 to 303, and therefore, khata 304 should be treated no differently.

[18] He also recognized the fact that the shamlat land of village Daggar Aulakh was occupied by Ala Maliks and Adna Maliks and Ala Maliks could not claim to be full owners of the Shamlat Deh because they themselves have been selling land including land in the said Shamlat to Adna Maliks; ix. This order of the Commissioner was challenged before the Member (Revenue), Board of Revenue, Punjab, Lahore through a revision petition which was dismissed on 20.05.1982 maintaining the rights of Adna Maliks.

[19] Ala Maliks challenged it in a review application, which was dismissed vide order dated 18.05.1983. They then invoked the jurisdiction of the High Court by filing writ petitions which were dismissed vide 1990 HC Judgment. This judgment declared, in terms of MLR 64, that the rights of Ala Maliks stood abolished, hence, their names as owners in the Shamlat Deh were removed; x.

[20] Ala Maliks assailed the said judgment before this Court through Civil Petition Nos.823-L and 824-L of 1990, which too were dismissed by 1991 SC Judgment, and maintained the rights of Adna Maliks. A review was filed against the 1991 SC Judgment, which was dismissed on 02.02.1992.5 This closed the dispute with respect to the rights of Adna Maliks as they had a judgement of this Court in their favour; 5 Review by the Supreme Court in CRP.

[21] Nos.128-L and 129-L of 1991. CAs.936 of 2012, etc. - 5 - xi. However, a new round of litigation commenced on account of the interpretation and implementation of the aforementioned 1990 and 1991 judgments of the High Court and this Court respectively. Mutation Nos.2064 to 2067 dated 28.02.1994 (1994 Mutations) became the basis of this dispute because once again these mutations were based on the Hasab Rasad Khewat Malikan granting Ala Maliks’ proportionate proprietary rights in the Shamlat Deh; xii.

[22] Adna Maliks again claimed implementation of MLR 64 and the 1960 Notification in the light of the judgment of this Court as it was their case that they were entitled to become proprietors of land which was in their possession. They challenged 1994 Mutations before the Assistant Commissioner/Collector, Bhakkar through an appeal which was dismissed vide order dated 07.02.2001 by upholding the said mutation such that the Shamlat Deh had been equitably distributed among all three factions i.e.

[23] Ala Maliks, Adna Maliks and Ala-khud-Adna Maliks; a revision against the said order was dismissed by the Executive District Officer (Revenue), Bhakkar on 26.11.2001. This order was assailed before the Member (Judicial-II), Board of Revenue, Punjab, where it was maintained vide order dated 30.03.2005 and it was held that the revenue officer was to distribute shamlat land according to the terms and conditions set forth in the various clauses of the Wajib-ul-Arz.

[24] Adna Maliks filed writ petitions before the High Court challenging these orders, however, petitions were dismissed vide the Impugned Judgment6; and xiii. The Impugned Judgment holds that the proprietary body means that three types of people (Ala Maliks, Ala-khud-Adna Maliks and Adna Maliks) and the entire proprietary body of the village will be entitled to the disputed land. 6 Judgment of the High Court by Mr.

[25] Muhammad Khalid Mehmood Khan, J. in WP. No.10329 of 2005. CAs.936 of 2012, etc. - 6 - 5. The Appellants before this Court, being Adna Maliks, argued that MLR 64 read with the 1960 Notification has to be implemented as the 1990 HC Judgment and 1991 SC Judgment recognize their rights on the ground that they were given proprietary rights with respect to the land in their possession in the Shamlat Deh irrespective of the fact that they had no proprietary rights in the village itself.

[26] Their case is based on the understanding that they have been granted proprietary rights on the basis of their possession in the Shamlat Deh irrespective of any customary practice or agreement as per the Wajib-ul-Arz or proprietary rights based on the Hasab Rasad Khewat. The Respondents, on the other hand, are Ala Maliks and they claim their rights in the Shamlat Deh on the basis of the longstanding custom and practice that Ala Maliks are given proprietary rights in the Shamlat Deh based on their proprietorship in the village.

[27] They do not deny the Appellants’ contention that MLR 64 did away with the proprietary rights of Ala Maliks, or that Adna Maliks became full owners of the land in their possession after MLR 64. They stated that Adna Maliks are entitled to possession as per the Jamabandi of 1945-46 which is undisputed and any land, in excess of what is recorded in the said Jamabandi, has to be returned to Ala Maliks.

[28] They also rely on the Wajib-ul-Arz to defend their possession and claim their shares in the Shamlat Deh. Respondent No.1 (Government of Punjab) supports the argument of Ala Maliks and argues that Adna Maliks cannot be given possession of the land in their actual physical control as that land is in excess of what they are entitled to. 6.

[29] The issue between the parties is the understanding of MLR 64 and the 1960 Notification and its interpretation as given by the aforementioned 1990 and 1991 judgments of the High Court and this Court respectively. Another issue between the parties is the implementation of MLR 64 as the Respondents accept that the Appellants have a right to proprietary possession in the Shamlat Deh, however, the dispute is as to the quantum of land they can claim a right over and the formula on the basis of which this possessory right has to be recorded. 7.

[30] In order to appreciate the contentions of the parties, it is necessary to understand the concept of the shamlat and the rights associated therein. The land revenue system in Punjab is old and dates CAs.936 of 2012, etc. - 7 - back to the Mughal rulers who introduced the system of land administration in the sub-continent.7 The British colonialists reformed and formalized the system by introducing legislation pertaining to the rights and responsibilities of owners of land vis-a-vis the state as well as their rights and duties towards tenants.

[31] A land revenue system was put into place with different officers such as the tehsildar, the patwari and the village headperson with their powers and duties and a dispute resolution system for managing disputes. In this regard, the concept of shamlat land was essentially a wasteland around the cultivated land owned by the village owners which they had the right to reclaim the land or allow others to cultivate the same.

[32] Fundamentally, it was a system of share or hissadari in the joint property of the village (known as the Deh) for those who had proprietary rights or cultivating rights in the village. By way of custom and practice, the common land of the village was considered to be the property of the village, which was to be used for common purposes for the benefit of the village.

[33] Those who owned property in the village were hissadars in the shamlat, being a collective right and not an individual right.8 This is because land ownership was a symbol of strength, prestige and unity in the village as the land owner was the link between the individual villagers and the village community and was responsible for developing the land in the common use area or shamlat.9 The land in the shamlat comprised of uncultivated land or wasteland (banjar) as well as vacant spaces used for extending the village boundaries.

[34] The landowners of the village had the first right to cultivate and use this land in proportion to their share of holding in the village itself. As they were the original settlers of the village, they enjoyed a higher right over and above the cultivators and possessors of land. Consequently, within the shamlat, there were certain rights classified as superior and inferior rights which governed the administration of the Shamlat Deh.

[35] The landowners were referred to as khewat dars due to their share in the khewat and collectively, the khewat dars were referred to as the malkan deh as they enjoyed a series of rights with respect to their ownership in the village; one of which was that they were entitled to a share in the shamlat as they claim ownership of all unappropriated land.

[36] These rights were mentioned in the village administration papers known as the Wajib-ul-Arz. Although 7 The Muslim ruler Sultan Alauddin Khilji who ruled Indo-Pak sub-continent from 1296 to 1316. 8 Qudrat Ali v. Government of N.W.F.P. (1993 SCMR 381). 9 SIR W.H. RATTIGAN, CUSTOMARY LAW (Universal Law Publishing Co.

[37] Pvt. Ltd. 16) (2007). CAs.936 of 2012, etc. - 8 - these rights varied from village to village, Ala Maliks enjoyed, in general, the right to reclaim the land and cultivate it, the right to partition the land, collection of land revenue and profits from the produce of the land. Significantly, the Wajib-ul-Arz was based on custom or usage as agreed by the villagers, which sets out the rights, duties and management of the Shamlat Deh. 8.

[38] On the other hand, the labourers, cultivators and grazers were responsible for collecting the land revenue for the benefit of the landowners and were referred to as mal guzars who were entitled to use the land in the shamlat for cultivation purposes. Their possession was acknowledged and documented. On the basis of their possession, they cultivated the land on payment of certain dues to Ala Maliks.

[39] As a consequence of their possession, they enjoyed the right to collect firewood or graze their cattle on the land and could not be evicted but did not have any identified share in the Shamlat Deh rather enjoyed rights over the land in their possession for cultivation purposes while the Adna Maliks could expand the area of their ownership by reclaiming shamlat land they could not bring.

[40] The Wajib-ul-Arz reflected the customs and rights practiced in the village for both Ala Maliks and Adna Maliks as the same being the document depicting the manner in which the malkan deh and the mal guzars could co-exist in the village.10 Essentially, this was all customary practice which was documented by the village in the form of an agreement reflected in the Wajib-ul-Arz.

[41] The Jamabandi (Register Haqdaran Zamin) provides for the details of the land and includes the name of the owner of the khewat as well as the cultivator (if any). The owners are reflected in the Jamabandi in column No.5 and the tenants in column No.6 which reflects the possessor-cum-cultivators of the land.

[42] The Hasab Rasad Khewat reflects the revenue being paid against the landholdings.11 9. The case law with respect to the rights and interests of Ala Maliks and Adna Maliks clearly shows that there was a dual form of ownership recognized in South-West Punjab where the original settlers, Ala Maliks, enjoyed superior rights of ownership on account of the fact that they broke the land, set up wells, cultivated the land and developed it.

[43] These Ala Maliks were granted land by the government at the time, and they 10 SIR JAMES M. DOUIE, THE SETTLEMENT MANUAL WITH NOTES (Mansoor Book House 6) (1981). 11 Circular No.78 dated 31.03.2001 (guidelines) addressed to all DCOs, ACs, Tehsildars etc. CAs.936 of 2012, etc. - 9 - gave permission to enter upon the land to Adna Maliks who cultivated or grazed the land.

[44] Effectively, Ala Maliks were superior owners and Adna Maliks were inferior owners based on possession and not on any proprietary interest. The general principle of this dual ownership was to protect the village boundaries from outsiders coming in.12 In the Ghulam Haider case, the issue was with reference to the exclusive ownership of Ala Maliks in the shamlat, which the High Court clarified that the said land does not exclusively belong to Ala Maliks.

[45] The Court held that Ala Maliks enjoyed the right to cultivate wasteland and after them this right was given to Adna Maliks. The High Court in the Ghulam Haider case after reviewing old settlement reports held that it was optional for Ala Maliks to take Jhuri from Adna Maliks, and in case the land was partitioned, the rights of Adna Maliks with respect to possession would remain such that it could not be distributed.

[46] Basically, this case clarifies that Ala Maliks enjoyed a superior possessory right compared to Adna Maliks and that Adna Maliks possessory rights were a recognized form of ownership as far back as the settlement record goes. The Ghulam Haider case also relied on the Wajib-ul-Arz and held that the conditions in Wajib-ul-Arz may not be applicable in future considering changed circumstances, which may be in the form of legislative and executive action.

[47] In the Mitha case, which is specifically with reference to the area of Daggar Aulakh in Bhakkar, the High Court examined the history of the settlement of this village and on the basis thereof concluded that there were two kinds of ownerships existing in this village being Ala Maliks and Adna Maliks who share possession of the shamlat land.13 In the Muhammad Ahsan case, MLR 64 has been relied upon with reference to the proprietary rights of Adna Maliks in the shamlat lands.

[48] While examining MLR 64 and the 1960 Notification, the rights of Adna Maliks were again recognized in the Muhammad Ahsan case by concluding that Ala Malkiat was abolished by MLR 64 and that now Adna Maliks are ‘made full proprietors of the land held by them’ and payment of land revenue to the government was a necessary prerequisite qualification to be regarded as Adna Maliks.14 Then, in the Hussaina case, this Court concluded that even though MLR 64 had been issued, the Wajib-ul-Arz did not show the abolishment of the rights of Ala Maliks nor did it show that Adna Maliks were given 12 Ghulam Haider v.

[49] Haider (PLD 1951 Lahore 92) (Ghulam Haider). 13 Mitha v. Ghulam Hussain (PLD 1949 Lahore 86) (Mitha). 14 Muhammad Ahsan v. Pathana (PLD 1975 SC 369) (Muhammad Ahsan). CAs.936 of 2012, etc. - 10 - proprietary rights.15 The Hussaina case also ruled since Ala Maliks’ rights have been terminated by MLR 64, then the areas would available for partition will now be resumable by the government, with the exception that areas that are in the possession of Adna Maliks will not be resumed.16 In the Fateh Sher case, which again was dealing with village Daggar Aulakh, this Court concluded that the revenue hierarchy throughout its decision and in terms of column No.5 of Jamabandi over the years recognized that the possession in the shamlat included Adna Maliks, and consequently, Ala Maliks could not claim exclusive possession of the shamlat to the exclusion of Adna Maliks.17 Hence, they were not entitled to a decree for possession of the shamlat land.18 The Fateh Sher case further held that Ala Maliks claim is based on their Ala Malkiat rights, which were abolished by MLR 64, and the same overrides all orders, decrees, rules or custom and usage; hence, they cannot claim exclusive possession in the shamlat of the village.

[50] In the words of Fateh Sher's judgment, this Court stated: [10]. With the coming into force of Martial Law Regulation No.64 any decree passed in favour of the appellants on the basis of their Aala Milkiyat cannot be executed and will be rendered absolutely ineffective. In these circumstances, no decree either for possession or ejectment of the respondents can be passed in favour of the appellants. (Emphasis Added) This view was again reiterated in the Tassaduq Hussain case which again was with reference to the same village in Bhakkar.19 This Court in the Tassaduq Hussain case has ruled that two essential conditions for Adna Malkiat are cultivating possession and payment of land revenue to the state.

[51] All of the aforementioned cases clarify that rights in the shamlat land were primarily governed by custom which translated into the Wajib-ul-Arz, and that there was no hard and fast rule with respect to customary practice in the shamlat as it varied from village to village. With specific reference to village Daggar Aulakh, the judgments show that the possessory rights of Adna Maliks are not denied and further that the claim of Ala Maliks of their exclusive share in the shamlat land of the village has been repeatedly denied after the issuance of MLR 64.

[52] In this regard, the case law relied by the opinion of the majority is clearly distinguishable from the facts of the instant case and does not address the issue at hand. 15 Hussaina v. Fazal Rahim Khan (PLD 1975 SC 574) (Hussaina). 16 Id. 17 Khanan v. Fateh Sher (1993 SCMR 1578) (Fateh Sher). 18 Id. 19 Tassaduq Hussain Shah v.

[53] Allah Ditta Shah (2023 SCMR 1635) (Tassaduq Hussain). CAs.936 of 2012, etc. - 11 - 10. The legislative history with reference to the land revenue system has not evolved much over the years. The Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887, which was the first law post-partition in relation to land revenue was adopted by Pakistan in 1957.

[54] This 1887 Act was repealed by Land Revenue Act, 1967 under which there are the Land Revenue Rules. The Punjab Land Dispositions (Saving of Shamilat) Act, 1951 was in relation to shamlat land. This law was repealed by the West Pakistan Land Dispositions (Saving of Shamilat Ordinance), 1959 (Ordinance) which was the Ordinance to provide for uniform interpretation with regard to the disposition of shamlat land in West Pakistan and it required that the shamlat land shall not be included in the sale of land unless specifically mentioned as the subject matter of such disposition.

[55] The objective was to avoid conveyance of shamlat land unless specifically stated in the sale deed. The term shamlat is defined in Section 2 of the said Ordinance as land described as shamlat in the record of rights and the land so described, shall be deemed to be shamlat, notwithstanding that the whole or a part of it is in the possession of one or more of the proprietors in the estate or of any other person.

[56] This Ordinance required that the right in the shamlat land was no longer contingent on land holding rather it could be sold, if required in the sale deed. 11. With this background, I shall examine Paragraphs No.3 and 22 of MLR 64, being relevant, which are reproduced below: [3]. Regulation to override other laws, etc.- The provisions of this Regulation, and any rule or order made thereunder, shall have effect notwithstanding to the contrary in any other law, or in any order or decree of Court of other authority, or in any rule of custom or usage, or in any contract, instrument, deed or other document. 22.

[57] Intermediary interests. Ala-Malkiat and similar other interests subsisting immediately before the commencement of this Regulation, shall on such commencement, stand abolished and no compensation shall be claimed by, or paid person affected by the abolition. MLR 64 introduced some land reforms with reference to ownership and possession of land and placed limits on individual holdings while at the same time, certain interests attached to the land were abolished.

[58] In this context, Paragraph No.22 of MLR 64 abolished the interest of Ala Malkiat. Subsequently, Secretary, West Pakistan Land Commission, Lahore issued a circular to all the Deputy Land Commissioners (Deputy Commissioners, Settlement Officers, and Political Agents) in West Pakistan, except Kalat Division and Collector, Karachi, relevant portion whereof, is reproduced below: CAs.936 of 2012, etc. - 12 - [I] am directed to invite your attention to the paragraph 22 of the Martial Law Regulation No.64, under which Ala Malkiat and similar other interests subsisting immediately before the commencement of the Regulation, shall on such commencement, stand abolished without any compensation, and to the replies received from you to letter No./1266-LR I, dated the 17th March, 1959 from the Secretary, Board of Revenue.

[59] The matter was considered by the West Pakistan Land Commission in its meeting held on the 9th June, 1959, and it was decided that:- (a) Adna Maliks should be made full proprietors of land held by them as such; (b) Adna Maliks should not pay any compensation to the Ala Maliks or the Commission; (c) With effect from Rabi 1959, the Adna Maliks should stop paying anything in cash or kind to the Ala Maliks; (d) Where a person is entered as Ala Malik and as well as Adna Malik, or where land is held only by an Ala Malik and there is no Adna Malik under him, the Ala Malik should be considered as a full proprietor and the entries in the revenue records should be corrected accordingly; (e) No Ala Malik will be entitled to any compensation on account of the extinguishment of his rights as laid down in Paragraph 22 of the Martial Law Regulation. 2.

[60] I am to request you that necessary action may be taken in accordance with the above decisions of the Commission. (Emphasis Added) 12. Consequently, the superior rights of Ala Maliks as owners of the land were abolished which meant the hissadari right in the Shamlat Deh was also terminated. The elimination of Ala Malkiat meant that the rights of these malkan deh or owners of the land, who were enjoying hissadari in the Shamlat Deh finished and what remains are possessory rights.

[61] So, they can claim proprietorship of the land in their physical possession but not of land claimed under the hissadari. Adna Maliks, on the other hand, were given proprietary rights over land in their possession by virtue of the 1960 Notification whose Clause 6(a) requires that they become full proprietors of land that they are in possession of.

[62] In the context of the dispute in hand, the Jamabandi for the year 1945-46 reflects the land in the possession of Adna Maliks in the Shamlat Deh which is not a disputed document. Similarly, Khasra Girdawari for the years 1958-62 shows the extent of possession in favour of Adna Maliks which is also not in dispute.

[63] Both documents are neither denied nor objected to by Ala Maliks rather have been relied upon by the Government of Punjab (Respondent No.1). So, effectively, Adna Maliks became equal owners such that the land under their cultivation became their ownership and land revenue for that land had to be paid to the government.

[64] CAs.936 of 2012, etc. - 13 - 13. Notwithstanding the above, the dispute between Ala Maliks and Adna Maliks continued after MLR 64 and the 1960 Notification with Ala Maliks seeking their hissadari in the Shamlat Deh based on Ala Malkiat rights. The first challenge came to the 1962 Mutation because it sanctioned the entire land in favour of Ala Maliks as they were shown exclusive owners of the Shamlat Deh based on the customary practice of Wajib-ul-Arz, which is totally contrary to MLR 64 and the 1960 Notification.

[65] Paragraph No.3 of MLR 64 clearly provides that the said MLR shall have effect notwithstanding any other law, order, decree, custom or usage. Meaning thereby that MLR must prevail over all other laws and custom or usage. Therefore, the 1962 Mutation was against the requirements of MLR 64. The 1962 Mutation was set aside by the Collector Bhakkar and required that entries be made as per possession.

[66] This order was maintained through the revenue hierarchy all the way to the High Court and then this Court in the aforementioned 1990 and 1991 judgments, which repeatedly maintained the right of Adna Maliks with respect to their possession in the Shamlat Deh and the fact that MLR 64 had abolished Ala Malkiat.

[67] More importantly, the 1990 HC Judgment and the 1991 SC Judgment both concluded that the revenue authorities did not commit any illegality in removing the names of Ala Maliks from column No.3 of the Jamabandi for the year 1945-46 in which they were reflected as owners. This fact alone is enough to show that the rights of Adna Maliks consequent to MLR 64 and the 1960 Notification had to be recognized, in that, the revenue record had to translate the possessory rights of Adna Maliks into their proprietary rights.

[68] In this regard, I have examined the voluminous revenue record and note that this revenue record shows that the possession of Adna Maliks in the Shamlat Deh has not been challenged. Secondly, the available records do not reflect that Ala Maliks had, at any time, challenged MLR 64 or the 1960 Notification; to the contrary, they repeatedly sought exclusive possession in the Shamlat Deh as against Ala-khud-Adna and Adna Maliks, which were denied by this Court.20 Furthermore, as per the revenue record and the Jamabandi relied upon by the Respondents, Adna Maliks did enjoy possession in Shamlat Deh.

[69] This possession goes back in time as per the old settlement record. Thereafter, the 1990 HC Judgment explained that Ala Maliks had earlier 20 Fateh Sher, supra note 17 and Ghulam Haider, supra note 12. CAs.936 of 2012, etc. - 14 - in 1941 filed suits for possession of land in the Shamlat Deh against Ala-khud-Adna Maliks and the High Court in the Mitha case held that Ala Maliks could not claim exclusive possession of the Shamlat Deh.

[70] Hence, even at that time, their claim for exclusive possession was denied as the revenue record and the Wajib-ul-Arz recognized the possession of Adna Maliks. The 1990 HC Judgment was challenged before this Court which maintained the same vide the 1991 SC Judgment and again challenged in review, where the judgment was maintained on 02.02.1992.

[71] Hence, these judgments recognized the rights of Adna Maliks and clarified that even where there were no Adna Maliks under Ala Maliks, Ala Maliks could not claim ownership in the Shamlat Deh on account of MLR 64. Furthermore, as per the revenue record and the Jamabandis relied upon, Adna Maliks did have possession in the Shamlat Deh; therefore, they are entitled to proprietary rights over the land in their possession consequent to MLR 64.

[72] On the question of whether Ala Maliks are entitled to claim full proprietorship of the Shamlat Deh after MLR 64 where there are no Adna Maliks, the 1960 Notification clarifies this position in its Clause 6(d). However, as per the facts and record of this case, Clause 6(d) is not relevant as the presence and possession of Adna Maliks is accepted factually and legally. 14.

[73] The Respondents have argued that the 1990 HC Judgment and 1991 SC Judgment do not create any special right in favour of the Appellants because these judgments recognized that the shamlat land belongs to the entire proprietary body of the village. They also argue that Adna Maliks are not entitled to the proprietary rights or possession beyond their entitlement which is recorded in the Wajib-ul-Arz and in terms of the Hasab Rasad Khewat.

[74] They rely on the Hasab Rasad Khewat and Wajib-ul-Arz and question the basis of Adna Maliks claim for proprietary rights. The 1990 HC Judgment, in relation to the rights of Ala Maliks and Adna Maliks, is of the view as under: […] A bare reading of Para 22 of MLR 64 shows that all intermediary interests like Aala Milkiat and similar other interests subsisting immediately before the commencement of the said Regulation stood abolished without payment of any compensation to any person who was affected by such abolition.

[75] By operation of Para 22 the rights of the petitioners as Aala Maliks stood automatically abolished, therefore, the revenue authorities did not commit any illegality in removing the names of the petitioners from column No.3 in which they were recorded as owners in the capacity of Aala Maliks. 8. The question still remains to be decided whether under Para 6(d) of Notification dated 3.3.1960 the petitioners were entitled to claim full proprietorship of the land even after abolition of intermediary interest.

[76] CAs.936 of 2012, etc. - 15 - Para 6(d) as is manifest from its reading was applicable where there was no Adna Maliks under the Aala Maliks. … Learned counsel for the petitioners when questioned as to how in view of this finding and the entry in column No.5 of shamlat deh as Adna Malik it could be maintained by the petitioners that there were no Adna Malik, learned counsel maintained that the entries in column No.5 of shamlat deh as a matter of fact relate to show description of land and they do not mean that the entire proprietary body of the village was to share the shamlat land as Adna Maliks.

[77] The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners in my view has no substance. Column No.5 as observed by the revenue authorities is meant for Ada Maliks. The entries showing the land as shamlat deh means that the entire proprietary body of the village was treated and considered to be Adna Maliks, therefore, it could not be argued that the petitioners were full proprietor of the entire land by virtue of Para 6(a) or Notification dated 3.3.1960 on the ground that there were no Adna Maliks under them. … 9.

[78] In view of the above discussion the orders passed by the revenue authorities for removal of the names of the petitioners as Aala Maliks in view of Para.22 of MLR 64 is unexceptionable. This Court upheld the aforementioned judgment of the High Court in 1991 SC Judgment in the following terms: [6]. The learned Counsel has failed to create any dent in the findings recorded by the High Court.

[79] The proprietary body in the village consists of three categories, namely, Aala Maliks, Aala Khud Adna Maliks and Adna Malik. As Shamlat belonged to the whole village and would be vesting in the entire proprietary body comprising the aforesaid three categories, we agree with the High Court that mention of “Shamlat Deh” in column No.5 of the Jamabandi is synonymous with the entire proprietary body of the village which alongwith Aala Maliks also includes Aala Khud Adna Maliks and Adna Maliks.

[80] It is thus not a case in which Aala Maliks had no Adna Maliks under them. Para 6(d) was, therefore, not attracted. The petitioners, thus, were not entitled to conferment of full proprietary rights on them. Hence, the contention of the Respondents is incorrect. Both the High Court and this Court have upheld MLR 64 and have denied Ala Maliks their claim to full proprietorship. 15.

[81] Now, the question is to what extent should Adna Maliks be given proprietary rights because it is the claim of the Respondents that they are in possession of land to which they are not entitled to any possessory or proprietary right. I am of the view that the only basis for Adna Maliks proprietorship in the Shamlat Deh is the possession that they enjoyed as of 03.03.1960.

[82] This is because Adna Maliks entered upon the land with the permission of Ala Maliks and were allowed to cultivate and develop the land prior to 03.03.1960; this possession over the land is not denied; their right to use the land is also not denied; what is in issue is reliance on the customary practice that proprietorship of land in the Shamlat Deh belongs to the entire village and therefore, Ala Maliks have a superior right over the land in the shamlat.

[83] However, this superior right was abolished vide MLR 64. Consequently, there are no superior CAs.936 of 2012, etc. - 16 - rights for Ala Maliks and any claim on the basis of Ala Malikat stands terminated after MLR 64. Where a person was entered in the revenue record as Ala Malik as well as Ala-khud-Adna Malik, they could retain that land as Adna Malik but not as Ala Malik.

[84] The only time they could retain their title as Ala Maliks is when there is no Adna Malik under them, however, this is not the case in the present Appeals. Consequently, the Respondents Ala Maliks cannot claim title on the basis of any hissadari notwithstanding the Wajib-ul-Arz or Hasab Rasad Khewat because Paragraph No.3 of MLR 64 specifically states that the provisions of MLR 64, and any rule or order made thereunder, shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other law, or in any order or decree of Court of other authority, or in any rule of custom or usage, or in any contract, instrument, deed or other document which has been relied upon in Fateh Sher case.21 Furthermore, the Wajib-ul-Arz and the Hasab Rasad Khewat did not incorporate the requirements of MLR 64 and the 1960 Notification.

[85] It continued with its customary agreement notwithstanding the law. It is also informed that the Wajib-ul-Arz and Hasab Rasad Khewat relied upon predate MLR 64, hence that too is of no consequence. Therefore, any claim of Ala Maliks with respect to the hissadari of Shamlat Deh cannot be entertained. So far as the Appellants’ claim to proprietary rights on the basis of possession is concerned that is pursuant to MLR 64, 1960 Notification and judgments of this Court. 16.

[86] So, the question now boils down to what area in the possession of Adna Maliks is lawful possession under MLR 64. The starting point of the dispute is MLR 64 and the 1960 Notification so whatever they had in their possession as of 03.03.1960 translates into proprietary rights. This possession of Adna Maliks is evident from Khasra Girdawari for the years 1958-62 which is not disputed.

[87] Thereafter, if more land has been acquired or is in the possession of Adna Maliks then this is a question of fact which they have to establish before the revenue authorities, who would have to raise the issue in accordance with law by following due process. In other words, the revenue authority would have to give notice to the relevant Adna Maliks to show exactly what part of the land is in excess after MLR 64 and the 1960 Notification and the Khasra Girdawari for the years 1958-62 having no connection to the land which was in 21 Fateh Sher, supra note 17.

[88] CAs.936 of 2012, etc. - 17 - their possession as on 03.03.1960. It is clarified that proprietary rights of Adna Maliks as on 03.03.1960 is based on MLR 64 and any excess land in their possession for which they claim proprietary right has to be based on some grant, lease, inheritance or lawful manner involving proper transfer of title in their favour.

[89] In the event that there is extra land with no legal backing and subject to Clause 6(d) of the 1960 Notification, an order must be passed to that effect and the land will resume in favour of the government. Reliance on the customary agreements is actually without basis as MLR 64 read with the 1960 Notification clearly sets out the legal position which was then interpreted by the 1990 HC Judgment and 1991 SC Judgment and the Fateh Sher case, hence, to suggest otherwise is in contravention to the law.

[90] It may be noted that the three villages at Bhakkar, Muzaffargarh and Layyah were not the only examples of this practice as many places in the Indian Punjab recognized similar rights and in-fact they promulgated the Punjab Village Common Lands (Regulation) Act, 1961 and the Punjab Abolition of Ala Malikiyat and Talukdari Rights Act, 1952 which abolished the rights of Ala Maliks and vested full proprietary rights in Adna Maliks.22 Therefore, the Appellant’s proprietorship claim on the basis of possession is backed by law and in accordance with the judgments of this Court. 17.

[91] On the basis of these facts, the exercise to determine the rights of Adna Maliks, on the basis of their possession, is an exercise in facts, based on the record. Despite clarity in the legal position, this dispute lingers on even today due to the reliance on the customary practices recognized in the Wajib-ul-Arz and the Hasab Rasad Khewat as neither of these documents show the abolishment of the rights of Ala Maliks.

[92] It is clarified that neither the Wajib-ul-Arz nor the Hasab Rasad Khewat can be relied upon. As the Jamabandi of 1945-46 is not disputed that becomes the start point. The entries in column No.5 thereof are accepted reflecting the possession of Adna Maliks. The Khasra Girdawari of 1958-62 is the next point of check, where the entries are 22 Section 3 of the Punjab Abolition of Ala Malikiyat and Talukdari Rights Act, 1952 states: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law, custom or usage for the time being in force, except as otherwise provided in this Act – (a) all rights, title and interest (including the contingent interest, if any, recognised by any law, custom or usage for the time being in force), of an ala malik in the land held under him by an adna malik shall be deemed to have been extinguished as from 15th June, 1952; and full proprietary rights shall be deemed to have vested in the adna malik free from all encumbrances. (b) the ala malik shall cease to have any right to collect or receive any rent or customary dues in respect of such land; provided that the extinguishment of the right of the ala malik as aforesaid shall not affect his rights to receive compensation in accordance with this Act.

[93] CAs.936 of 2012, etc. - 18 - not denied. So possession up to the Khasra Girdawari of 1958-62 is accepted as being possession of the Adna Maliks who have become proprietors of the same. Beyond this Khasra Girdawari, that is after 1962, the Appellants are to establish their claim of being Adna Maliks entitled to proprietary rights over the land under their possession as Adna Maliks which means that they must establish their possession based on their rights as Adna Maliks with reference to any land allegedly held in excess to any lawful right.

[94] To ensure due process, the guidelines for the revenue officers are as follows: § Possession as per MLR 64 and the 1960 Notification as on 03.03.1960 is not in dispute. § Possession acquired after MLR 64 has to be explained in terms of Paragraph No.16 of the instant judgment. § Subject to Clause 6(d) of the 1960 Notification, excess land should be resumed by the government subsequent to MLR 64. 18.

[95] In view of the aforementioned, Adna Maliks are entitled to proprietary rights for the land in their possession in consequence of MLR 64 and the 1960 Notification. Hence, these Appeals are allowed and the Impugned Judgment is set aside. ‘APPROVED FOR REPORTING’ Azmat | Kehar Khan Hyder/- JUDGE ORDER Of THE BENCH By majority of two to one (Ayesha A.

[96] Malik, J. dissenting), Civil Appeal Nos. 936, 937 and 938 of 2012 are dismissed. Judge Judge Judge Announced on 16th September, 2024 at Islamabad.