Case No: C.M.A.5602/2021
Case Title: Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, through Chairperson, Dr. Mehdi Hasan and others v. Federation of Pakistan through Ministry of Education and others
Subject: Miscellaneous/Others
Judge: Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed
Judgment Date: 11-06-2021
Upload Date: 11-06-2021
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2021 SCP 156
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.m.a._5602_2021.pdf

[1] order dated 19.02.2020 , has already been spent and rather some liabilities have also accrued . In the application, the Commission has prayed for granting of an amount of Rs.14.99 4 million for clearance of outstanding liabilities and also for allocation of budget for the year 2021 -2022. Notic e of this application be issued Ministry of Religious Affair and Inter faith Harmony and also to the Attorney General for Pakistan.

[2] In the meanwhile, the amount of Rs.14.994 million be disbursed to the Commission . For allocation of new budget, l et a proper response be filed by the Ministry of Religious Affairs and Interfaith Harmony . We, however, be noted that one man Commission shall ensure to maintain proper accounts for the moneys disbursed to it and spent by it for the purpose of implementation of the Commission. 2.

[3] The learned counsel for the applic ant in Civil Misc. Application No.4821 of 2018, states that the very Commission created by the Ministry of Religious Affairs and Interfaith Harmony is not in accordance with law for the reasons that it has been constituted through an executive order and no law to support such a Commission has been passed.

[4] She contends that the function ing of the Commission constituted by the Ministry is, C.M.A. , etc - 4 - therefore, not legal and the Ministry should ensure that the Commission b e constituted with proper s upport of law. Let submissions on such point s be made on the next date of hearing. Adjourned to a date after the summer vacations. 3.

[5] Dr. Ramesh Kumar, Co-opted Member of the Commission, states that the property on Plot No.3 2, NP-04 Napier Quarter s Saddar Town -I, Karachi, measuring about 716 Sq. Yards was a Dharam Shala and placed before the Court photographs of such building , which is being demolished for making way for a new construction of a commercial plaza.

[6] He states th at this property has been leased out by the Evacuee Trust Property Board to some private person and he is in the process of demolish ing the Dharam Shala and raising of a new building. It is stated by the Chairman, Evacuee Trust Property Board that the matter regarding the very Dharam Shala has been decided by the High Court of Sindh, where it has allowed the Evacuee Trust Property Board to lease it out, have it demolished and rais ed new construction.

[7] Such an order of the High Court of Sindh is not before us. Th e very photograph apparently shows that the building is of Dharam Shala constructed in the ye ar 1932, which can be read from the marble sl ab affixed on the building and must be a protected heritage building. Let notice be issued to the Secretary Heritage, Government of Sindh to file its report regarding the building.

[8] In the mean time, no demolition activity of the said building shall be conducted by anyone and possess ion of the building and the land shall be taken over by the Commissioner Karachi, who shall manage the same and not allow C.M.A. , etc - 5 - any person to enter upon it. No demolished material shall be allowed to be removed .

[9] This be done by the Commissioner Karachi today and report, in this respect, be submitted to the Office of the Supreme Court . The office of thi s Court shall communicate this order to the Commissioner Karachi, today. CHIEF JUSTICE JUDGE Bench -I Islamabad 11.06.2021 ‘NOT APPROVED FOR REPORTING ’ Mahtab /* JUDGE