Case No: C.M.A.2243/2012
Case Title: 3rd and 10th fornightly progress report in ISAF Containers Scam
Subject: Miscelleneous
Judge: Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry
Judgment Date: 04-03-2013
Upload Date: 04-03-2013
Citations: 2013 SCMR 634
SC Citations: 2013 SCP 19
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/CMA.2243-2010.pdf

[1] ORDER The report (CMA No.1112 of 2013) has been submitted on behalf of the Federal Board of Revenue, which has been examined with the assistance of the learned counsel for the FBR . 2. The pr oceedings in the instant Suo Moto Case pertaining to the ISAF Container Scam commenc ed in the year 2010. During the course of the proceedings, allegations surfaced , which prima facie, constituted “mal-administration ”, as defined by Section 2(3) of the Establishment of the Office of Federal Tax Ombudsman Ordinance, 2000, (hereinafter referred to as “the Ordinance” ).

[2] Consequently , vide order dated 30.9.2010 , a Reference in terms of Section 9 of the Ordinance, sent to the Federal Tax Ombudsman. In the said or der, 14 specific questions were framed. CMA No.2243 -2010 - 2 - 3. The Federal Tax Ombudsman submitted its report, giving the following Findings and following making Recommendations :- FINDINGS: (i) The quality of data held by PRAL was found to be highly unreliable.

[3] The available cr oss-checks within FBR were also found to be highly vulnerable to fraud and corrupt practices of various actors involved in Afghan transit trade. (ii) It was soon realized that the abuse was massive, though difficult to quanti fy with a high degree of precision . (iii) It was estimated that at least 7,922 transit containers were pilfered within Pakistan during the last almost four years.

[4] However, this could be just a tip of the iceberg. (iv) The estimated loss to national exchequer during 2007 -June 2010, base d on 7,922 containers, was worked out at Rs.19 billion. (v) It was gathered that the Customs procedural framework being highly porous suffered from serious vulnerabilities . (vi) While responsibility in general terms has been fixed, the individuals involved in various mega scams of recent years are to be indentified th rough criminal investigation for which a mechanism is provided under Section 17 of the FTO Ordinance. (vi) One-Customs manual clearance system was found particularly prone to huge transit scams.

[5] CMA No.2243 -2010 - 3 - (viii) The senior management of Customs failed to take necessary steps to put in place appropriate countermeasures against repeatedly occurring scams. (ix) The Investigation of four mega scams of containers in past few years indicates a clear pattern. The phenomena of pilferage is not new, neither are the glossing over efforts by senior officers to provide cover up through creating hindrances in investigations, manipulation of record and data, diverting focus by ‘fact finding committee.’ Deliberate attempts to diff use focus of investigation against corrupt and influential officials through ‘fact finding committee’ were clearly discerned. (x) In Lunar case the Collector who had failed to prevent wrong clearance of 52 containers laden with liquor was made part of the ‘f act finding committee’.

[6] To frustrate the course of investigation by Director General (Intelligence and Investigation ). (xi) The leadership of Customs rather than initiating appropriate disciplinary/criminal proceedings against the real culprits repeatedly trie d to put a different gloss on these scams. (xii) The modus operandi in these mega scams remains the same ; fake/forged documents , primitive and manual clearance and processing systems, wide discretion in the hands of unscrupulous customs officials, lack of transparency and effective accountability, involvement of seniors otherwise responsible for oversight. (xiii) The picture that emerges is of gross inefficiency, maladministration and corruption in an organization CMA No.2243 -2010 - 4 - that is geared to further principally individual and communal self interest of a few individuals at the cost of Pakistan and her people. (xiv) This report is an exploratory start -up to.

[7] Although it provides some answers, it raises many more questions. The report indentifies the work that needs to be done in fut ure and provides a good roadmap for the way forward. RECOMMENDATIONS: (i) Customs clearance and cross border certification and reconciliation procedures need massive improvement, consolidation and rationalisation . (ii) Cross checks need to upgraded, diversifi ed and externalized. (iii) Transport system used for ATT needs to be organized on competitive basis, and transporters given a level - playing field. (iv) Only bonded carries should be allowed to transport ATT cargo.

[8] The vehicle fleet used for the purpose must be up graded in terms of technology input for safe transpiration of transit cargo. (v) Security of cargo needs immediate enhancement through RFID seals, and live monitoring through GPS. (vi) ATT cargo should bear bar code embeddings for ease of detection, and to minimise the chances of its smuggling back into Pakistan.

[9] CMA No.2243 -2010 - 5 - (vii) ISAF/UN/NATO should adopt the same technology and transport precautions as are being used by US Forces (e.g. RFID seals and effective tracking/ monitoring though GPS) (viii) Collusion by and corruption of C ustoms Officials be effectively discouraged and deterred in a sustainable manner. (ix) A specialized and dedicated Collectorate needs to be created to deal exclusive with the entire cargo in transit to Afghanistan. (x) The definition of smuggling should be broa dened to include in its purview any enroute pilferages of transit goods. (xi) The Directorate General (Intelligence and Investigation) needs to be suitably upgraded to act as an effective deterrent against actual and potential tax evaders and their accomplice s within the Customs Department. (xii) For better administration, FBR should be split into two Boards, one dealing exclusively with Customs matters and the other dealing with taxes like income tax, sales tax and federal excise duty.

[10] If that is not found approp riate at this stage, a competent and honest senior officer of Pakistan Customs Service may be appointed as deputy chairman FBR. The measure will provide better focus on matters relating to management of Customs.” 4. The said report inter alia indicated the quantum of the loss caused to the Public Exchequer .

[11] Such loss in fact is approximately CMA No.2243 -2010 - 6 - Rs.55 billion as was disclosed by Mr. Suleman Siddique, the then Chairman, FBR, which fact was incorporated in our order dated 22.11.2011. The report now filed by th e FBR , indicates that to -date the amount recovered is only Rs.5,602,754/ - which for all intents and purposes is insignificant, when examined in juxta position , with the loss to the Public Exchequer admittedly occasioned , as has been admitted by the FBR. 5.

[12] The performance of the FBR , as indicated by the report , now submitted is far from satisfactory . Despite elapse of almost one and a half year since the Report was compiled by the Federal Tax Ombudsman , no progress worth mentioning has been made for the recovery of the loss identified , which is regrettable. 6.

[13] It has also not been brought on record as to how f ar the Recommendations made by the FTO in his above mentioned report have been implemented despite the fact that a time fram e in this behalf , having specifically been mentioned in Section 11(1) of the Ordinance. 7. Consequently, let the report be obtained from the F ederal Tax Ombudsman as well as Chairman, FBR as to the extent of the implementation of the Recommendations of the FTO by the Departm ent and further such reports shall also identify the modus operandi proposed and required to be undertaken to efficiently and expeditiously effect the recovery of the loss caused to the Public Exchequer.

[14] Such report should be filed within two weeks. CMA No.2243 -2010 - 7 - 8. The Chairman, FBR , is directed to appear in person , on the next date of hearing. Re-list after two weeks. Chief Justice Judge Judge Announced on _______________ at Islamabad Judge