Case No: C.P.L.A.1354/2020
Case Title: Sundas v. Khyber Medical University thr. V.C. Peshawar & others
Subject: Educational Institutions Cases/Others
Judge: Mr. Justice Athar Minallah
Judgment Date: 12-10-2023
Upload Date: 19-10-2023
Citations: 2024 SCMR 46
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 319
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._1354_2020.pdf

[1] judgment dated 12.02.2020 of the H igh Court of Peshawar respectively pass ed in Writ Petition s Nos.219-A of 2018, 258 -A of 2019 & 1312 -P of 2018 ) Sundas … (in CP - ) Naila Khan … (in CP - ) Mst. Reema Naz … (in CP - ) Petitioners Versus Khyber M edical University thr. V.C. Peshawar & others … (in CPs -1354 - ) The V.C.

[2] Khyber Medica l University , Peshawar and others … (in CP - ) Respondents For the petitioner s: Ms. Shirin Imran, ASC (in CPs -1354 & 1355 of 2020) Mr. Amjad Ali, ASC (in CP -1447 of 2020) For the respondents: Mr. Abdul Munim Khan, ASC (in all cases) Date of hearing: 12.10.2023 JUDGMENT Athar Minallah, J.

[3] In all these petitions the petitioners have sought leave against the consolidated judgmen t of the High Court , dated 12.02.2020 , whereby separate petitions filed by them invoking the jurisdiction under Article 199 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (‘Constitution ’) were dismissed. 2.

[4] The petitioners were registered by the Khyber Medical University (‘University ’) as enrolled student s of the affiliated medical institutions . The affairs of the medical institutions and eligibility of students relating to pursuing medical studies are regulated by the Pakistan Medical and Dental Council (‘ Council ’) established under the Pakistan Medical and Dental Council Ordinance, 1962 (‘ Ordinance of 1962’ ).

[5] Pursuant to CP  etc. 2 powers conferred under section 33 of the Ordinance of 1962, the Council had made the 'Admissions in MBBS/BDS Courses and C onditions for House Job/ Internship/ Foundation Year Regulations, 2013 ' (‘Regulations of 2013 ’). The Regulation s of 2013 had, inter alia , explicitly determined the criteria regarding the right to continue medical studies by provid ing that a student who fai led to clear the first professional or the 2nd professional in four chances , availed or un -availed , would no more be eligible to continue medical/dental studies of MBBS or BDS course, as the case may be .

[6] It was further provided that s uch a student would al so become ineligible to seek admission as a fresh student . The regulation s were binding on all the recognized medical institutions and the University and, therefore, the eligibility criteria was duly in corporated by the latter in its own regulations i.e the Khyber Medical University Examination Regulations, 2008 ('Regulations of 2008 ').

[7] Admittedly, t he petitioners failed to pass the examinations in four chances, availed or un -availed and thus they had become ineligible to continue their medical studies unde r the Regulations of 2013. Before their r espective registrations were revoked by the University , the petitioners chose to invoke the p lenary jurisdiction vested in the civil court s by filing separate suits.

[8] I njunctive order s, directing the University to al low the petitioners to take the reexaminations , enabled them to pursue their medical studies des pite having lost their eligibility in the light of the aforementioned regulation s. It was on the basis of such injunctive order s that the petitioners were allow ed to pursue their studies in violation of the binding regulations of the regulator .

[9] The University subsequently issued notifications whereby the registration s of the petitioners were cancelled in accordance with the Regulations of 2013. The notifications were challenged before the High Court through constitutional petitions and which were dismissed through the consolidated impugned judgment.

[10] CP  etc. 3 3. We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioners. Though they have conceded that the Regulations of 2013 wer e valid a nd applicable, they have argued that the petitioners ought to have been allowed to complete their studies because they had passed the 1st and 2nd professional examinations.

[11] T hey have stressed that the petitioners would be exposed to extreme hardsh ip if they were prevented from completing their studies . Ms. Shireen Imran, ASC , has argued that the eligibility condition prescribed under the Regulation s of 2013 were subsequently repealed in 2020 and , therefore , it would be unjust and unfair to treat the petitioners differently.

[12] The counsels have urged to allow the petitioners to complete their degrees on compassionate grounds. 4. It is not disputed that the petitioners had lost their eligibility to continue the ir medical studies in accordance with the s tandards set out under the Regulations of 2013 , which were declared by the High Court to be valid and intra vires and, subsequently , the judgment was upheld by this Court1.

[13] The regulator i.e the Council had prescribed the conditions relating to eligibility and they were binding on all the medical institutions. The eligibility criteria was prescribed in the context of academic performance of a student and by no stretch of the imagination could it be construed as unreasonable.

[14] It is settled law that courts are required to exercise utmost restraint in matters relating to policies, discipline and other academic affairs of educational institutions. Refusing to interfere is a rule and deviation there from is an exception which can only be justified on the basis of clear and undisputed violation of the law.

[15] The reluctance of the court s to interfere with academic affairs is based on the foundational principle that the academicians and educational institution s are the best judges because f ormulating policies and eligib ility criteria falls within their exclusive domain. The standards 1 Sadia Nawaz Khan v.

[16] Federation of Pakistan and others ( CP 928 of 2017 ) CP  etc. 4 prescribed and set out in the regulations re lating to academic bodies , determination of eligibility to pursue studies and other related policies are generally not open to judicial review unl ess they can be clearly shown to contravene the law or to be shockingly unreasonable or perverse.

[17] T he courts are n ot equipped nor have the capacity to deal with academic matters , let alone substituti ng opinions formed by experts or professionals. This cour t has rigorously upheld and given effect to the regulations made by the Council under the Ordinance of 19622. The emphasis of the learned counsel s regarding extending relief on the basis of compassion and hardship is misconceived.

[18] It is the duty of every court to implement the enforce d laws and to decide t he disputes in accordance therewith, rather than on the basis of co mpassion . The court s cannot grant any relief in breach of the law nor create a right in favour of a litigant which the latter does not pos sess by or under the law3.

[19] Compassion and hardship cannot be relevant consideration s when there is no scope for it in the relevant law s4. 5. The petitioners had become ineligible and the right to pursue their studies was lost when t hey had failed to pass t he examinations after four chances, availed or un -availed. The Regulations of 2013 were binding and the courts , by granting injunctive orders , had transgressed their jurisdiction because it had t he effect of suspending the regulations which were competentl y framed under the Ordinance of 1962.

[20] The courts had disregarded the principles enunciated by this Court in the aforementioned judgments . The petitioners had chosen at their own risk to continue their studies , knowing that under the binding regulations they were not eligible. The injunctive order s passed by the respective civil 2 Muhammad Hamid Shah v.

[21] Pakistan Medical & Dental Council and others ( 1996 SCMR 1101 ) 2 Ms. Asma Ghafoor v. Principal, King Edward Medical College and others ( 2011 SCMR 1311 ) 2 Munaza Habib and others v. The Vice Chancellor and others ( 1996 SCMR 1790 ) 2 VC University of Punjab v. Mst. Maria Hidayat Khan and others ( 2007 SCMR 1231 ) 3 Directo r General, National Savings v.

[22] Balqees Begum and others ( PLD 2013 SC 174 ) 4 Aina Haya v. Principal, Peshawar Model Girls High Court and others ( 2023 SCMR 198 ) CP  etc. 5 courts did not create any right in favour of the petitioners nor were they competent to make them eligible for the purpose of pursu ing their medical studies in violation of the stand ards set out by the regulator in the Regulations of 2013. 6.

[23] We would add that e very citizen is unquestionably entitled and enjoys a right to choose the pursuit of a profession or trade but such a right is not absolute. The regulat ing authority may set mi nimum standards in the context of exercising the right in order to safeguard the interests and welfare of the public.

[24] The Ordinance of 1962 and the regulations made pur suant to powers conferred there under regulate the medical profession , including the affa irs of the medical education and institutions , to promote the interest and wellbeing of the ultimate stakeholders i.e the public who would repose and rely on the knowledge and skill of medical practitioners.

[25] They will be placing their lives in the hands of those students who would be graduating from the medical institutions. The standards set by the experts under the Regulations of 2013 regarding the determi nation of eligibility, including the necessary skills and knowledge required to pursue the medical pr ofession are, therefore, not open to judicial review , nor can the court substitute them with its own. 7.

[26] For the foregoing reasons, no case is made out for grant of leave and thus the petitions are dismissed as being without merit. Chief Justice Judge Judge Islamabad the 12th October 2023 APPROVED FOR REPORTING (Aamir Sheikh)