Case No: C.P.L.A.3499/2016
Case Title: Malik Abid Hussain v. Returning Officer and others
Subject: Election/Challenge of Nomination Papers
Judge: MR. JUSTICE FAISAL ARAB
Judgment Date: 16-11-2016
Upload Date: 18-11-2016
Citations: 2017 SCMR 132
SC Citations: 2016 SCP 155
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/C.P._3499_2016.pdf

[1] order dated 25.10.2016 passed by the Lahore Hig h Court, Multan Bench in Writ Petition No. ) Malik Abid Hussain … Petitioner VERSUS Returning Officer, Wards 1 to 47 Municipal Committee etc … Respondent s For the Petitioner: Mr. Dil Muhammad Khan Alizai, ASC Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR (Absen t) For the Respondent s: N.R.

[2] Date of Hearing: 15.11.2016 Announced on: 16.11.2016 JUDGMENT FAISAL ARAB , J.- The petitioner was one of the candidates on the reserved seat of ‘Worker ’ of the Municipal Committee, Muzaffargarh. Respondent No. 2, who was also a candidate for the said seat, sought r ejection of petitioner’s nomination papers on the ground that the petitioner is not a worker as he holds LPG dealership and operates his business from a business concern established in the name of ‘Malik Ele ctro Gas Centre , Multan Road, Muzzaffargarh ; that being a businessman , he is a tax payer having 0114289 -5 as his National Tax Number and has also been elected as President of the LPG Union , Muzzaffargarh.

[3] Respondent No.2’s plea for rejection of petitioner’ s nomination papers however did not find favour with the Returning Officer , who accepted latter’s nomination. 2. The acceptance of petitioner’s nomination was challenged by Respondent No. 2 in Election Appeal No.  before the Additional District & Sessions Judge , Muzaffargarh who was the Civil Petition No.  2 Appellate Authority for the Local Bodies Elections , 2016 .

[4] After taking into consideration contents of the l etter written by DCO Muzzaffargarh to the Secretary Industries, Government of Punjab , wherein the petition er was shown as one of the distributors of LPG in the District of Muzaffargarh and the contents of t he daily report of District Office (Civil Defence) regarding LPG price s issued by the District Officer (Civil Defence) Muzaffargarh which reflected the name of the petitioner as dealer/distributer of LPG and the fact that the petitioner held the office of the President of LPG Union , the Appellate Authority came to the conclusion that the petitioner does not fall within the ambit of the definition of ‘worker ’ as defined in Section 2 (mmm) of the Punjab Local Government Act, 2013 and rejected his nomination papers vide order dated 22.10.2016 .

[5] The petitioner then challenged the decision of the Appellate Authority in Writ Petition No.  before the Lahore High Court, Multan Bench but the same was dismissed vide impugned order dated 25.10.2016 , hence this petition. 3. Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the petitioner ’s claim of being a ‘worker ’ ought not to have been rejected summarily at pr e-election stage and in case the petitioner is elected , the same can be challenged after the election .

[6] He concluded by stating that depriving the petitioner of his right to contest the election s in summary proceedings a mounts to disenfranchis ing him. In support of this contention he relied upon the case of Muhammad Mujtaba Abdullah Vs. Appellate Authority Tehsil Liaquatpur District Rahim Yar Khan (2016 SCMR 893). 4.

[7] It has undisputedly come on the record that the petitioner is a dealer of LPG and distrib utes LPG from his business concern i.e. ‘Malik Electro Gas Centr e, Multan Road, Muzzaffargarh’ . He also held the office of President of LPG Union which takes care of the business of the traders who sell LPG gas to consumers from their outlets in Tehsil Muz affargarh.

[8] As a tax payer, the petitioner has a National Tax Number as well . In the decision rend ered by the Appellate Authority, which has been affirmed in impugned judgment, it is clearly stated that on an inquiry from DCO Muzaffargarh , the Secretary Ind ustries, Government of Punjab confir med that the petitioner is one of the LPG distributors of District Muzaffargarh , having dealership contract for Civil Petition No.  3 Muzaffargarh Tehsil.

[9] We have also noted that status of the petitioner , that was made basis for rejecting h is nomination paper s by the Appellate Authority , has not been specifically denied by the petitioner either in memo of Writ Petition that he filed in the High Court or i n the present petition seeking leave to appeal .

[10] The Punjab Local Government Act, 2013 has defined ‘worker’ in Section 2 (mmm) in the following words : “‘worker ’ means a person directly engaged in work or is dependent on personal labour for subsistence living and includes a worker as defined in the Punjab Industrial Relations Act, 2010. ” Thus only such person , who is directly engaged in physical work and for his subsistence rel y on physical labour or falls within the definition of ‘worker ’ as contained in the Punjab Industrial Relations Act, 2010 qualifies to contest election on the reserved seat of ‘worker’ and not a person who is a businessman or a trader.

[11] Similar view has been taken by this Court in the case of Muhammad Hussain Vs. District Returning Officer (2008 SCMR 488). 5. In the present case t he petitioner has nowhere denied his status of being a dealer /distributor of LPG for the Tehsil of Muzaffargarh . Being in the business of LPG , the peti tioner also did not deny that he held the position of the President of LPG Union of Muzaffargarh that comprises of LPG traders of Muzaffargarh , he therefore cannot a rrogate to himself the status of a worker as defined in the Punjab Local Government Act, 2013 .

[12] We therefore find no legal justification to interfere with the impugned order. This petition having no merit is accordingly dismissed and leave i s refused. JUDGE JUDGE JUDGE Islamabad , the Announced on 16.11.2016 by Hon’ble Mr. Justice Faisal Arab Approved For Reporting Khurram