Case No: C.P.L.A.1049/2009
Case Title: Case_2497
Subject: N/A
Judge: Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry
Judgment Date: 19-02-2010
Upload Date: 19-02-2010
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2010 SCP 2
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/CPs1406of09etc.pdf

[1] ORDER After passing order in judgment dated 16 th December, 2009 in the case of Dr. Mobashir Hassan Vs. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2010 SC 1) appearance of the representative s/prosecutors on behalf of the NAB in different cases has become irregular, except in few cases wherein one of the Prosecutors is appearing regularly and during the hearing of th is case we have noticed that despite allowing sufficient time to the NAB no progress has been made and Mr.

[2] Sultan Mansoor, Acting Prosecut or General , who appeared , also could not answer satisfactory as to why the 2 matter was not settled so far. Therefore, we have summoned the Chairman , NAB in the Court and asked him as to why , in pursuance of the Judgment in the case of Dr. Mobashir Hassan (ibid) the Prosecutor General and Additional Prosecutor General , have not been removed, so the new incumbent may take the ch arge for effective prosecution of the cases and appea r before this Court as well as other Courts.

[3] He state s that he was under the impression that all this was to be done by the Attorney General or by the Ministry of Law . It is pointed out to him that act ion was to be initiated from his office and he would perform his duty in respect of action which was required to be taken in the light of the judgment of 17 Members Bench , referred above .

[4] He request s that time be given to him so he may start performing his part of obligation from today onward. It may be cleared that if no action relevant to his performance is taken by him, the coercive measures including attachment of his salary will be taken and directions will be made that no one on behalf of the NAB shou ld appear unless the compliance of the judgment with regard to the Prosecutor General and Additional Prosecutor General is made.

[5] However, we give him a chance on his assurance that all necessary steps shall be taken in this regard . He is directed to appear on the next date of hearing and submit progress report in respect of the observations made in the case of Dr. Mobashir Hassan (ibid) 2. Despite clear directions no progress has been made in satisfying the claim s except that according to Mr.

[6] Tari q Mehmood Bhatti I/O, NAB he has registered claims of about 11000 people from whom amount was taken by Syed Rahat Mehmood . In this regard, a report has also been submitted by the NAB. 3. Malik Bashir Awan appeared on behalf of RDA to whom notice was give n in view of the statement of Syed Rahat Mehmood .

[7] He is interested to purchase the property owned by accused. Learned counsel states that the claim so put forward by the accused is not correct as in the Adyala village, where the RDA intends to acquire the land for the purpose of building a city, he had only a small portion of land i.e. 2 kanals. In this behalf Syed Rahat Mehmood has offered flimsy explanation, which exfacie, is not relevant for the disposal of the claim s of the claimants because he alongwi th other co -accused persons are responsible to satisfy their claims.

[8] He has however, requested that if two weeks’ time is given to 3 him, he would be in a position to come out with a positive result. At his request, case is adjourned to 12.3.2010. Chief Jus tice Judge Judge Islamabad, the 19 February, 2010 Nisar/*