Case No: C.P.L.A.278/2023
Case Title: Muhammad Taimur v. Chairman National Accountability Bureau NAB Headquarter, Islamabad and others
Subject: NAB/Bail
Judge: Mr. Justice Athar Minallah
Judgment Date: 17-04-2023
Upload Date: 26-04-2023
Citations: 2023 SCMR 1093
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 124
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._278_2023.pdf

[1] judgment dated 11.01.2023 of the Peshawar High Court , Peshawar passed in Writ Petition No.2964 -P of 2022) Muhammad Taimur …Petitioner (s) Versus Chairman, National Accountability Bureau NAB Headquarters, Islamabad & other s …Respondent(s) For the petitioner (s): Barrister Syed Mudasser Ameer , ASC For NAB: Raja Rizwan Ibrahim Satti, Special Prosecutor Date of hearing: 17.04.2023 ORDER Athar Minallah , J.- The National Accoutability Bureau (“Bureau ”) had initiated an inquiry in exercise of power s conferred under the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 (“ Ordinance of 1999 ”).

[2] The inquiry was regarding the alleged involv ement of an unregistered entity , M/s Pslashuk (“ Company ”). It was alleged that the owners/management of the Com pany were operating and managing an online business which was in the nature of a ponzi scheme , attracting the offence of cheating the public at large.

[3] Muhammad Taimur (“ petitioner ”) was arrested on 02.06.2021 during the inquiry proceedings. He had initially sought b ail on merits , which was declined by the High Court vide order dated 05.10.2021. After some time the petitioner filed a petition before the Judge , Accountability Court, seeking bail on the ground of delay in the conclusion of the trial, which was refused , and CP 278 of 202 3 2 consequently the petition was dismissed.

[4] The High Court , however , allow ed the constitutional petition and extended the concession of bail, subject to furnishing bail bon ds with two sureties. In addition , the High Court made the release of the petitione r subject to surrending his passport and the Cryptocurrency code to the Investigating Officer of the Bureau.

[5] His name was also ordered to be placed on the exit control list. 2. The learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the condition of sur rendering the Cryptocurrency code is unreasonable and amounts to denying the peti tioner the right to avail the concession of bail granted by the High Court .

[6] On the other hand the learned Special Prosecutor of the Bureau has contended that the condition has been imposed in order to ensure that the petitioner does not ta mper with the evidence , in this case the Cryptocurrency . The Investigating Officer present in the Court has explained that the cellular phone which was in the use of the petitioner and contai ns the details of the Cryptocurrency was seized and it is in the custody of the Bureau .

[7] He has further stated that there is likelihhod of ta mpering with the Cryptrocurrency after the petitioner has been released. He has stressed that in the circumstances i t is crucial to prevent the petitioner from having access to the Cryptocurrency so that its integrity remains protected. The learned counsel for the petitioner has taken the stance that the latter has no concern with the Cryptocurrency and , therefore , surrending its code is an unreasonable condition which would merely deny him the concession of bail granted by the High Court on the ground of delay in conclusion of the trial.

[8] CP 278 of 202 3 3 3. It is settled law that bail cannot be withheld as a punishment. Moreover , the conviction and incarceration of a person who is ultimately found guilty upon conclusion of trial can repair the wrong caused by erroneously extending the relief of interim bail but , no satisfactory re paration can be offered to a person who has been wron gly accused f or unjustified incarceration at any stage of the case , if in the end a verdict of acquittal is handed down1.

[9] It is equally settled law that when the court comes to the conclusion that the accused is entitle d to be release d on bail then in such eventuality the grant of bail cannot be made subject to any rider or condition that would render the concession of bail granted by the court as ineffective or redundant2.

[10] Bail is one of the most important element s of the scheme of criminal law and its consideration is premised on the principle that an accused i s presumed to be innocent until proven guilty. The primary purpose of granting bail is to ensure attenda nce of an accused before the court. It also enables the accused, who is presumed to be innocent , to pursue normal activities which are essential for life such as earning a livelhood or taking care of the needs of the family.

[11] When a court is satisfied that a case for grant of bail has been made out then refusal to execrise discre tion in favour of re leasing the accused , subject to conditions described under section 499 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1898 (“Cr.P.C. ”) would not be in conformity with the right to liberty and the fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution.

[12] The conditions descri bed under section 499 are ordinarily sufficient to g uarantee the presence of an accused before a court during the trial proceedings. Nonetheless, the court may refuse grant of bail or make it subject 1 Manzoor and others v. The State (PLD 1972 SC 81) 2 Javed Iqbal v. The State (2023 SCMR 401) CP 278 of 202 3 4 to conditions in order to regulate the conduct or moveme nt of an accused.

[13] A court , for example , may be satisfied that , if released on bail, the accused would abscond or that there exists a likelihood of tampering with the evidence or influencing the witnesses. In such eventualities the court must exercise its d iscretion with care and caution , by bala ncing t he scales of justice and equity .

[14] Even if bail is to be granted subject to conditions then they must not be unreasonable, disproprtionate or excessive. The foundational principles of criminal law are the presum ption of innocence of an accused and that bail must not be unjustifably withheld beause it then operates as a punishment before being convicted upon conclusion of the trial.

[15] The un necessary and unjustified incar ceration of an under trial prisioner simulten ously becomes a burden on the taxpayers and the already overcrowded prisons. 4. In the case in hand , the High Court was satified that a case for grant of bail was made out and the discretion was also excercised accordingly.

[16] While gra nting bail it was m ade subject to certain conditions. One of the conditions for release was surrendering the Cryptocurrency co de. It is the case of the petitioner that he has no concern or nexus with the alleged Cryptocurrency and, therefore, the condition is harsh and exces sive and thus amounts to denying to him the concession of bail granted by the High Court.

[17] However, the prosecution wants to ensure that the evidence in the form of Cryptocurrency is not tampered with. The factum whether the petitio ner has the ability to access the Cryptocurrency could not have been decided at bail stage because it would require deeper appreciation of evidence , which is yet to be recorded dur ing the trial.

[18] The condition, therefore, appears to be excessive and unreasonable because it CP 278 of 202 3 5 denies the petitioner the right to liberty granted by the High Court by extending the concession of bail on the ground of delay in the conclusion of the trial. Moreover, there are more than fifteen hundred witnesses on the list of the prosecution who would be entering the witness box.

[19] The early conclusion of the trial, therefore , is not forseable. On the other hand, the concern of the prosecution is regarding the likelihood of the petitioner's access to the Cryptocurrency. Admittedly , the cellular phone and the sim were seized and they are in the custody of the Bureau. The Investigating Officer has stated that if the sim could be blocked it would serve the purpose because in such an event access of the petitioner to the Cryptocurrency would be denied.

[20] It appears to us that, while exe rcising its d iscretion , this crucial aspect was not taken into consideration by the High Court . The condition of surrending the code, therefore, was exce ssive and disprop ortionate to the purpose which it sought to be achieved. We are , therefore, of the opinion that it would be appropriate to remand the matter to the High Court to the extent of reconsidering the condition regarding the surrender of the Cryptocurrency code and thereafter excercise its d iscretion so that the purpose of secur ing its integrity is achieved while , simultaneously, enabling the petitioner to avail the concession of bail granted on the ground of delay in the conclusion of the trial .

[21] We convert this petition into an appeal and dispose it by remanding the matter to th e High Court to the extent of reconsidering the condition whereby the petitioner has been directed to surrender the Cryptocurrency code. The High Court may, inter alia, seek assistance of an expert in order to set out reasonable condition(s) to prevent the petitioner from having access to the Cryptocurrency.

[22] Since the right of liberty is involved CP 278 of 202 3 6 and the High Court has already exerc ised its d iscretion by extending the concession of bail, therefore, we expect that the proceedings will be completed at the ear liest, preferably within three weeks from the date of recei ving the certified copy of this order.