Case No: C.P.L.A.1282/2014
Case Title: Haider Ali & another v. District Police Officer, Chakwal & others
Subject: Writ Petition/Quashment
Judge: Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja
Judgment Date: 04-09-2015
Upload Date: 05-09-2015
Citations: 2015 SCMR 1724
SC Citations: 2015 SCP 75
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/C.P._1282_2014_dt_4-9-15.pdf

[1] order dated 20.06.2014 of Lahore High Court, Raw alpindi Bench passed in Writ Petition No.1194 of 2014) Haider Ali & another Petitioner(s) VERSUS DPO Chakwal & others Respondent(s) For the Petitioner(s): Syed Rafaqat Hussain Shah, AOR with Haider Ali petitioner No.1 On Court’s notice: For the Federation : Mr.

[2] Sohail Mehmood, Dy. Attorney General, Syed Nayab Hassan Gardezi, ASC/Standing Council For Govt. of Balochistan: Mr. Tariq Mehmood Butt, Prosecutor General Mr. Muhammad Ayaz Khan Swati, Addl. AG Syed Parvaiz Akhtar, Dy. Prosecutor General For Govt. of KPK: Mr. Mujahid Ali Khan, Addl. AG For Govt. of Punjab: Mr.

[3] Razzaq A. Mirza, Addl. AG Ch. Zubair Ahmed Farooq, Addl. PG For Govt. of Sindh: Mr. Shehryar Qazi, Addl. AG Date of hearing: 04.09.2015 ORDER Jawwad S. Khawaja, CJ .- The facts of this case are all too typical for our criminal justice system. A party to a family dispute, which appeared to be of a civil nature, filed a compliant with the police to allegedly pressurize the other party.

[4] Th e police initially (presumably in good -faith) rejected the complaint. The party then attempted to have the case registered through the Justice of Peace. This application was also denied. Thereafter, a writ petition was filed, on the basis of which the High Court ordered investigation of the case.

[5] What culminated thereafter was a series of appeals and petitions taking the matter right up to the Supreme Court. 2. When the case came up for hearing before us, the unsatisfactory state of affairs was apparent. W e were perplexed to note that the police failed to register the FIR on the CP 1282 of 2014 2 complaint being filed, even though the provisions of Section 154 Cr.P.C. do not provide them any discretion in deciding whether or not they can register a FIR.

[6] Numerous judgments of this Court have also reaffirmed this principle. If the complaint was indeed false and vexatious, as the petitioner allege d, then the police should have filed a case against the complainant under the relevant provisions of the Pakistan Penal Code. However, the relevant officials chose not to do this and instead pushed the parties into various rounds of litigation involving a simple issue of whether the FIR should be registered.

[7] Similar maladministration was noted in the police investigation. Neither the challan had been submitted within the stipulated period of fourteen days nor was there any valid or apparent reason as to why the investigation of the case had not been concluded. It was clear to us that such unjustified delays created room for wrongdoing.

[8] W hat made the matter worse is that there were no effective safeguards within the police to guard against such maladministration. And there was no accountability. 3. It would be an under statement to say that the state of our criminal justice system which le d to this case, and many others like it, is deficient.

[9] The majority of human right cases which come before us concern in one way or another police abuse of powers or inefficiency. Even as we heard this case, we noted many instances of police excesses. Thes e numerous complaints cannot be adequately dealt with by the apex Court nor is it the primary function of the apex Court to probe into the transparency or honesty of police investigation.

[10] This is a function which has to be performed by the Provinces and by the Federation. Ineffective investigation and weak prosecution is similarly another matter which has created deep ruptures in our justice system and which we identify on a daily basis. Therefore, seeing how this matter is recurrent, of great public import ance and directly related to the fundamental rights of the citizens at large, we issued notices to the Federation and the four Provinces to submit a comprehensive and effective plan which CP 1282 of 2014 3 would be necessary for ensuring that the grievances of citizens are redressed at their doorsteps in the shortest possible time and that instances of wrongdoing or maladministration are dealt with promptly. 4.

[11] At our request Khawaja Haris, learned Sr. ASC agreed to assist us. He reviewed the reports submitted by the Provi nces and also solicited suggestions and proposals from the Advocates General, Prosecutors General, Secretaries Prosecution and Inspectors General of Police, as well as from some of the eminent retired civil servants who had served in the Police or the Pros ecution Department. 5.

[12] In response thereto, a number of suggestion s and proposals were received by Khawaja Haris, learned Sr. ASC and the same were placed on the record through C.M.A. No.. Thereafter, on the basis of the suggestions and proposals so received, Khawaja Haris, learned Sr. ASC, formulated 72 questions considered to be relevant for purposes of ensuring effective redressal of complaints, fair, honest and effective investigation and for ensuring accountability of the police.

[13] These questio ns were then forwarded to all the aforementioned officials of the four Provinces and the retired civil servants. Their responses were placed on the record of this Court through C.M.A. No. . The learned Sr. ASC also provided his own proposals with respect to the subject matter through C.M.A.

[14] No. . Based on our directions, Mr. Sarwar Khan, Secretary Law & Justice Commission of Pakistan, also submitted his report on the issue with suggest ions through C.M.A. No. . 6. A bare overview of the above mentioned reports and the numerous responses we received from the various state officials during the course of this case, would be enough to show that there are a number of fundamental issues with our criminal justice system.

[15] Everyone admits as such. Even the learned Prosecutor General Punjab admitted before this Court that the Government is “ aware that steps have to be taken to ensure that the police and CP 1282 of 2014 4 prosecution departments which are meant to ensure the enforcement of the law fairly and h onestly, do not in fact become instruments of oppression of the public at large ”.

[16] While admission of fault is the first step towards making amends, our concern is that despite appreciation of the problem no effective steps have been taken to enhance the ef ficiency and competence of the concerned government departments. What is more troubling is that certain key issues faced by our justice system could be addressed instantly, in some cases through administrative measures and in others through legislation. 7.

[17] It may be useful at this stage, to refer to some of the key issues which were highlighted before us. For ease of reference, we have categorized the issues based on whether they relate to: (i) pre -investigation stage (registration of FIR); (ii) investi gation stage; (iii) prosecution and trial; and (iv) accountability and transparency.

[18] A. Pre-investigation stage (registration of FIR) Any person familiar with the workings of a police station in Pakistan knows that the provisions of Section 154 Cr. P.C. are flouted and misused . Section 154 Cr. P.C. provides, inter alia, that every information given to an officer in charge of a police station relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, whether given in writing to him or reduced in writing by an of ficer in charge of a police station, shall be signed by the person giving it, and the substance thereof shall be entered in a book to be kept by such officer in such form as the Provincial Government may prescribe in this behalf.

[19] While this provision is ma ndatory in nature, often the concerned police station refuses to register the FIR even if the information provided to it relates to the commission of a cognizable offence. Khawaja Haris, learned Sr. ASC, noted in his report that in the year 2011 alone, out of 419,365 FIRs lodged in the Province of the Punjab, 28,787 (approximately 7%) were registered pursuant to orders of the Justices of Peace under Section CP 1282 of 2014 5 22-A (6) of the Cr.

[20] P.C. What is astonishing is that despite orders of the Justices of Peace, FIRs we re not registered in 554 (approximately 2%) cases. It is thus clear that a number of persons suffer and are pushed into litigation because of failure of the police to register the FIR. Litigation too, it seems, does not guarantee relief.

[21] The Justice of Pea ce cannot issue coercive process for compliance of his orders. At best, learned Sr. ASC submits, the Justice of Peace can refer the matter to the higher official s of police for taking actions against the defaulting SHO under Article 155 of the Police Order , 2002, but such a direction to proceed against the official for misconduct is rarely implemented.

[22] Another issue at this stage is the registration of false or vexatious complaints to pressurize and harass people. While, the Pakistan Penal Code provides fo r measures through Sections 182 and 211 to discourage and punish false complaints, it is common knowledge that very few cases involving such offences are filed and prosecuted.

[23] This must be unacceptable, especially given that Section 154 of the Cr.P.C. requ ires mandatory registration of FIR. If the Police therefore has no discretion in registering an FIR, action must be taken against those who abuse this provision of law and use the police as an instrument for their designs .

[24] B. Investigation stage While the registration of a FIR is mandatory, initiating investigation is not. Reading section 156 Cr.P.C with section 157 Cr.P.C. it appears that the officer in charge of a police station shall proceed to initiate investigation of a case only where, inter alia , from information received, he has reason to suspect the commission of an offence.

[25] This interpretation is further fortified when we read clause (b) of the proviso to sub -section (1) of section 157 Cr.P.C, which provides CP 1282 of 2014 6 that “ if it appears to the officer i n charge of a police station that there is not sufficient ground for entering on an investigation he shall not investigate the case. ” Yet, what we often find is that on registration of a FIR, the relevant police officer without application of mind directly proceeds to arrest the accused.

[26] We have held time and again (see for instance Muhammad Bashir’s case (PLD 2007 SC 539), that the police should not move for the arrest of the accused nominated in the FIR unless sufficient evidence is available for the arr est. Yet to our dismay we have to deal with such matters on a daily basis. Perhaps, as some of the reports referred to above point out, the issue lies in the fact that there are no real guidelines available to the police which would channel their discretio n and judgment.

[27] This coupled with their lack of training, makes defective investigation almost a near possibility. In this regard, it is instructive to note the following observations of Khawaja Haris, learned Sr. ASC in his report: “It is indeed a fact t hat even today an officer investigating a case of murder has no concept of (1) securing the scene of the crime so that the place where the occurrence has taken place as well as the surrounding area is not trampled or invaded by the general public before th e investigation officer has had an opportunity to collect evidence from the place of occurrence, (2) how to secure incriminating articles, likes pieces of cloth, blood, fiber or hair etc from the place of occurrence and its surrounding area, (3) how to lif t and secure fingerprints from various articles found inter alia at the scene of the crime and to get them examined and matched for purposes of investigation, (4) how to ensure that all incriminating articles are properly secured from the spot and delivere d promptly and intact to a forensic laboratory and/or fingerprints expert in safe custody and without being tampered with, and to expeditiously CP 1282 of 2014 7 obtain the results from the forensic laboratory so as to be credibly admitted in evidence during the trial.” The lack of training and emphasis on the development of specialized investigation officers and facilities, is perhaps indicative of the wider issue in policing: the police it appears is still largely used to secure the interests of the dominant political reg ime and affluent members of society, rather than furthering the rule of law.

[28] As a result, where, even in this debilitating environment, an honest and competent investigation officer is found, his work is thwarted at one juncture or another. C. Prosecutio n and trial In our order dated 15.01.2015, we noted how at least in the Punjab more than 65% of criminal cases do not result in conviction.

[29] The learned Prosecutor General Punjab also stated that in even those cases where a person has been convicted by the trial court, a substantial number are acquitted by the appellate forums. These figures are indicative of weak investigation and gathering of evidence which we noted above, but are also a result of serious deficiencies in our prosecution system.

[30] The followi ng issues among others were highlighted by the various parties in this respect: i. Lack of cooperation between the police and prosecution at the investigation stage: there appears to be no standardized SOPs which guide the relationship between prosecutors a nd police officers and allow them to aid each other in the fair and timely investigation of the case. ii.

[31] Lack of training and competent prosecutors: prosecutors are not provided proper training and facilities. In addition, competent prosecutors because of la ck of incentives resign from their service for better opportunities. There also appears to be no effective quality review system in place to check underperforming prosecutors.

[32] As a result, the best prosecutors are not being retained in service. CP 1282 of 2014 8 iii. Protectio n of witnesses: we have been informed that in many cases the prosecution’s case is damaged as key witnesses resile from their stated position because of pressure from the accused. iv. Adjournment requests by lawyers and delay in fixation of cases by judicia ry: the defendant’s lawyer deliberately at times delays resolution of cases.

[33] Delays and injustice is also caused as a result of backlog in the judicial system and frequent transfers of presiding judicial officers. D. Accountability and transparency During the course of the proceedings, we directed the Inspector General of Police Punjab to submit figures relating to actions taken against delinquent police officials.

[34] As a result, various reports were submitted regarding actions taken against delinquent po lice officials on the recommendation of the prosecution department. An overview of these reports would make two things clear. First, we noted that the figures submitted in these reports kept changing. We assume that such changes were made in good -faith to present the correct position before this court.

[35] But this exercise at the very least lays bare the attention which senior police officials place towards delinquents within their ranks: they did not even have for ready reference an accurate collation of comp laints against police officials! Second, even if we accept the most conservative figures of complaints submitted before us, we note that in only 20 cases was some form of major punishment (reduction in rank and pay) awarded to delinquent officers (in anoth er report this figure was stated to be 10).

[36] We must therefore ask whether sufficient measures are being taken by senior police officials to deter delinquent behavior and misconduct by police officials. It was also noted by us that the systemic accountabili ty forums which were created pursuant to the Police Order, 2002, in the form of National and CP 1282 of 2014 9 Provincial Public Safety Commissions and Police Complaints Authority are either inactive or not operational.

[37] Transparency in policing activities i s another major issue. Public money is used to finance the police, which in turn is supposed to deliver services to the public. At present however information regarding funds allocated to the police, police plans and annuals performance reports are not publicly available.

[38] How then are the public and state functionaries supposed to properly examine (and if required make changes to) the delivery of this important public service, if the relevant facts and figures are not available to them? 8. The issues noted above can be a ddressed, provided there is political and administrative action to transform the police and prosecution into an effective public service.

[39] There are many examples where we have seen this. The Police Order, 2002, is one such example of political will aimed a t transforming the police. During the course of these proceedings, our attention was also drawn to various initiatives taken by the Punjab and KPK Government s towards making the police an effective public service.

[40] Regrettably however such actions are few a nd far between. Even in the case of the Police Order, 2002, it is discouraging to note that after the passage of the 18th Amendment, the provinces of Sindh and Balochistan aban doned the Police Order and shifted to a policing regime which is reminiscent of colonial times where the police was used to keep the ‘natives ’ on a tight leash. 9.

[41] In some of our earlier orders, we have noted the high degree of political and administrative apathy which has translated into the failing criminal justice system before us. It must be emphasized that the failure to address individual grievances of citizens causes frustration amongst them which, in turn, may lead to lawlessness.

[42] It also needs to be emphasized that a functioning criminal justice system is directly linked to the enforcement CP 1282 of 2014 11 prosecutors; and (ii) accountability mechanisms and review systems of public prosecutors. viii. The Attorney General and the respective Advocate s General shall submit a report in court within one month from the date of this order on the steps being taken to provide witness protection in their relevant jurisdiction and the fund s dedicated for this purpose. ix.

[43] The respective bar councils may take appropriate action against lawyers who deliberately seek adjournments with a view to delay trial. Respective district judges are also directed to impose costs on such lawyers and hear criminal cases involving the liberty of persons on a day to day basis to the extent possible. x.

[44] Respective heads of police of the Federation an d the Provinces shall submit a report within one month of the date of this order which details the relevant police complaints and accountability mechanisms in place and the actions taken under such mechanism against delinquent police officials. This inform ation shall also be made publicly accessible in English as well as Urdu on their respective websites.

[45] The Attorney General a nd respective Advocates General shall submit a report detailing compliance in this respect within one month from the date of this or der. xi. Police budgets (disaggregated by district and local police stations, functions, human resource allocation and a statement of their utiliz ation), police plans and annual performance reports shall be made public ly accessible on the respective Federal a nd Provincial police websites and submitted in Court within one month of the date of this order.

[46] The Attorney General a nd respective Advocates General shall submit a report detailing compliance in this respect within one month from the date of this order. xii. The Attorney General and the respective Advocate s General of the Provinces of Sindh and Baluchistan should submit in C ourt within one month from the date of this order reports which examine the constitutionality of the policing regime established by the Po lice Act, 1861, currently in force in Sindh and the Balo chistan Police Act, 2011 currently in force in Balo chistan.

[47] This report should inter alia state whether the se policing statutes allow the c onstitution and organization of a politically independent pol ice force which is consistent with the protection of the fundamental rights of citizens. xiii. The Federal and Provincial Ombudsmen should submit in Court within three months from the date of this order, good -administration standards for police stations and sho uld also submit a report which outlines the measures being taken to curb maladministration in police stations. xiv.

[48] Provincial Information Commissioners should notify transparency standards relating to police services and functions and submit these standards i n Court within three months from the date of this order. CP 1282 of 2014 12 xv. The Law and Justice Commission of Pakistan shall prepare a consolidated report based on the various reports received by the Court till date and the proposals submitted by Khawaja Haris, learned Sr.

[49] ASC, detailing the relevant amendments which are requir ed in legislation to improve the criminal justice system. The said report shall be submitted in court within three months from the date of this order. Copies of the said report shall also be sent to th e National and Provincial Assemblies. 10. It is so ordered.

[50] Let the matter com e up for hearing in the 3rd week of October, 2015 . Chief Justice Judge Judge ISLAMABAD, THE 4th September , 2015 A. Rehman APPROVED FOR REPORTING.