Case No: C.P.134/2012
Case Title: Pakistan Bar Council through its Chairman v. Federal Government through Establishment Division and others
Subject: U/A 184(3)
Judge: Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial
Judgment Date: 31-08-2018
Upload Date: 21-01-2019
Citations: 2019 SCMR 389
SC Citations: 2019 SCP 14
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Const.P._134_2012_21012019.pdf

[1] order dated 6.3.2018 . C.M.A.: Impleadment application by Pakistan Bar Council through Chairman Legal Education Committee v. The Federal Government thr. Secretary Establishment and others C.M.A.: Impleadme nt application by Islamabad Bar Council C.M.A.: Concise Statement on behalf of respondent No.2 College of Legal & Ethical Studies (Coles), Abbottabad .

[2] C.M.A.: Additional Documents (copies of show cause notices issued to the privat e law colleges of KPK) on behalf of respondent No.10 . C.M.A.No.1864 of 2010 -: 2 : C.M.A.: Impleadment application by Zahid Hussain C.M.A.: Impleadment application by Muhammad Umar Jatoi C.M.A.: Impleadment application by City Law College v.

[3] Fede ral Government through Secretary M/o Education etc. Islamabad and others C.M.A.: Impleadment application by Muhammad Shafique In attendance: Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC Mr. M. Anwar Kamal, Sr. ASC Mr. Zafar Iqbal Kalanori, ASC Mr. Muhammad Arsh ad, Secy. PBC Mr. Muhammad Ahsan Bhoon, ASC Mr. M. Shoaib Shaheen, ASC Ch.

[4] Zulfiqar Ahmed Khan, ASC Ms. Bushra Qamar, ASC (Chairperson Executive Committee, Punjab Bar Council) Mr. Bilal Ahmed Qazi, ASC (For Islamia University BWP) Syed Iftikhar Hussain Gillani, Sr. ASC Mr. M. Akhtar Ali, ASC (For K.P. Private Law Colleges) Mr. Zafar Iqbal, Ch. ASC (Topper Law College) Rai Bashir Ahmed, ASC (In CMAs 1844 & ) Rai M.

[5] Nawaz Kharral, ASC (CMA. No. ) Mr. Zafarullah Khan Khakwani, ASC Dr. Amanullah, Chairman, Affiliation Committee, BZU Ch. Muhammad Umar, Registrar BZU (For BZU) Mr. Munir Ahmed Khan Kakar , ASC Raja Abdul Rehman, ASC (For Zargoon Law College) Mr. Riasat Ali Azad, ASC (Alfalah Law College /Kashmor Law College ) Mr.

[6] M. Ikram C haudhry, Sr. ASC (In C.M.As.4012 & ) Mr. M. Qasim Mirjat, AOR (In C.M.A.) C.M.A.No.1864 of 2010 -: 3 : Mr. Junaid Akhtar, ASC (In C.M.A.) Mr. Waseem -ud-Din Khattak, ASC (for University of Peshawar) Mr. Zulfiqar Ahmed Bhutta, ASC (For Pakistan College of Law ) Mr. M. Amin Sandhela, in -person (In CMA ) Mr.

[7] Fawad Saleh, ASC (For Col es Law College) Mr. Shaukat Ali, Principal , (Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Law College, Nausheroferoz ). Mr. Abdul Ali, Owner of Ali Law College Sanghar , Sindh . (CMA -) Mr. M. Faseeh ud Din Wardag, ASC (For Jalawan Law College, Khuzdar) Mr. Amanullah Q azi, Director, Intelligence Law College, Moro, Sindh Mr.

[8] Faisal Javed, VC School of Law , Lahore Mr. Hassan Fareed, Legal Advisor, University of Management & Techno logy, Lahore. Mr. Saleem Akhtar Warraich, ASC Mr. Aftab Sohail, College of Law, Gujranwala. Mr. M. Afzal Khan, ASC (For Pakistan Law College, L ahore ) Mr. Nafeer A. Malik, ASC (Principal Quaid e Azam Law College, L ahore. ) Rana Ali Akbar, Adv. (For T opper Law College) Mr.

[9] Mushtaq Ahmed Mohal, ASC Sh. Irfan Akram ,ASC Mrs. Tasneem Amin, AOR (For Institute of Law) Mr. Ahmed Qayyum, ASC (For Lahore Law College) Mr. Abbas Mirza, ASC (For Farabee Law College) C.M.A.No.1864 of 2010 -: 4 : Dr. Khalid Ranjha, Sr. ASC (For Punjab U niversity) Mr. Anwar ul Haq Pannu, ASC Mr. Qaiser Amin Rana, ASC Mian Tariq Manzoor, ASC Sardar Muhammad Aslam, ASC Mr.

[10] Faiz Ahmed Jandran, ASC Mr. Kifayat Ali Jaskani, Principal Shan -e-Ali Law College, Tando Adam Barrister Adnan S heikh, ASC (For Top per Law College, Lhr.) Mr. Mushtaq Ahmed Mohal, ASC (For P SC) Malik Matiullah, ASC (For Asian Law College) Malik Anique Khattana, ASC (CMA -) Rana M. Arif, ASC (CMA -2475 -L/18) Mr.

[11] Ashfaq Bhullar, ASC Rai M. Nawaz Khan Kharral, ASC (For Qarakura m Law College/CMA -) Usama Shafique, Assistant Registrar , University of South Asia . On Notice: Mr. Sajid Ilyas Bhatti, Addl.A ttorney General for Pakistan. assisted by : Barrister Menal Tariq Mr. Qasim Ali Chohan, Addl. A.G. Pb. Mr. Shehryar Q azi, Addl.

[12] A.G. Sindh Malik Akhtar Hussain Awan, Addl. A.G. KP Mr. Ayaz Swati, Addl. A.G. Balochistan Syed Naveed Abbas, ASC Mr. Aftab Mustafa, ASC (for respondent No.7) Mr. Waseem Hashmi, Advisor, HECP Mr. Asif Munir, Director, HECP Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR (For HECP ) Date of hearing: 20.08.2018 & 24.8.2018 at Lahore and 28.8.2018 at Islamabad .

[13] C.M.A.No.1864 of 2010 -: 5 : O R D E R Umar Ata Bandial, J . – CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.134 OF 2012 & CIVIL MISC. APPLICATION NO.1864 OF 2010 IN CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.9 OF 2005 . The Rule of law in our country is a bedrock of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (“Constitution”) .

[14] The Judicature has a Constitution al duty to enforce the Rule of law to safeguard the Constitution. In our legal system the Courts perform dispute resolution in accordance with the Constitution and the substantive and procedur al law laid down thereunder . The system flourishes by positive and productive cooperation between the Bar and the B ench for the ascertain ment of the truth and decision o f controversies according to the relevant and applicable law.

[15] An independent, competent, honest and industrious Judicature requires an equally independent , dynamic, honest and dedicated Bar in order to effectively provid e justice in accordance with law to all members of the society. 2. Over the years, the legal profession has attracted more and more people as a career of choice.

[16] This has led to a growing demand for institutions imparting legal education to train lawyers for the Bar and the Judiciary. Notw ithstanding that the standards of proficiency for entry to the Bar since the last 45 years is regulated by Legal Practitioner s and Bar Council s Act, 1973 (“Act”) , careful monitoring , supervision and enforcement of such standards has been lacking due to com placency and neglect.

[17] It was i n these circumstances that this Court considered the matter of declining standards of legal education in Pakistan Bar Council vs. The Federal Government & Others (PLD 2007 SC 394) (“PBC Judgment”) and delivered a momentous judgment mandating sound professional training and skill in both academic and vocational disciplines to be essential attributes for ensuring good advocacy.

[18] I n this behalf, i t was identified that the Pakistan Bar Council (“PBC”) established under the Act an d the Higher C.M.A.No.1864 of 2010 -: 6 : Education Commission of Pakistan (“HEC P”) established under the Higher Education Commission Ordinance, 2002 are the key regulators to supervise and enforce professional standards in legal education . 3.

[19] Pursuant to the vie ws expressed in the PBC J udgment and based upon its own deliberations, the PBC framed the Pakistan Bar Council Legal Education Rules, 2015 (“Rules”) . These Rules lay down detailed provisions on several matters concerning legal education in particular, criteria for recognition of degree awarding institutions and for affiliation of law colleges thereto.

[20] It may be observed that the Rules were framed during the proceedings for the implementation of the aforementioned PBC Judgment of this Court. The Rules lay down, inter alia , the eligibility for admission to LL.B programme, inspection of law faculties and department s of law colleges for establishing their qualifying status as affiliates of recognized degree awarding university or their disaffiliation for failing to comply with the Rules.

[21] It is in the said backdrop that by order dated 21.01.2018 of this Court , the PBC constituted a Special Committee for Structural Reforms in Legal Education . Four Provincial commissions and one for Islamabad Capital Territory (“ICT”) were formed for t his purpose by the Court. Their task was to inspect affiliated law colleges that have mushroomed in the market and to report on the standard of legal education , training and services imparted by them.

[22] Based on the findings of these inspections , the Special Committee of the PBC ha s submitted recommendations to th e Court. These recommendations were examined, deliberated, considered by th e Court during the proceedings held at the Branch Registry at Lahore on 20.08.2018 & 24.08.2018 and at the Principal Seat on 28.08.2018 .

[23] The recommendations are well thought out and have been approved by th is Court with minor modifications . 4. For the reasons to be recorded later CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 134 OF 2012 & CIVIL MISC. APPLICATION NO.1864 OF 2010 IN C.M.A.No.1864 of 2010 -: 7 : CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.9 OF 2005 stands disposed of and the following declarations and directions are issued in light of the recommendations submitted by the Special Committee of PBC : Court ’s declarations & directions: 1.

[24] Restoration of Bar Entrance Examination [La w Graduate Assessment Test (LAW -GAT)]. A Law Graduate Assessment Test (LAW -GAT) of law graduates seeking enrollment to the Bar shall be held on quarterly basis by HECP as the executing institution throughout Pakistan based on a question bank prepared for the Assessment Test . 2.

[25] Test for Entry to Law College (Law Admission Test) (LAT). A law admission test for all law colleges in Pakistan shall be held biannually by the HEC P. The outline of such a law admission test is given below: “LAW ADMISSION TEST (LAT) Division of Questions Marks Nature of Questions Essay (either in English or Urdu) 15 200 words maximum Personal Statement (either in English or Urdu) 10 200 words maximum MCQs: MCQs: English 20 Synonyms/Antonyms/Pre - positions MCQs: General K nowledge 20 MCQs: Islamic Studies 10 MCQs: Pak Studies 10 MCQs: Urdu 10 Vocabulary MCQs: Math 05 Basic Math Total Marks 100 3.

[26] Specification of Affiliating Universities and their territorial jurisdiction. The following universities are recognized and authori sed by the PBC under the Rules to be law degree awarding institution s. The territorial jurisdiction of each such university is indicated against its name : C.M.A.No.1864 of 2010 -: 8 : Sr.

[27] No. Affiliating University Area of Jurisdic tion 1. University of Baluchistan Whole of the Province 2. University of Peshawar Districts & Civil Divisions of Peshawar, Malakand and Mardan. 3. Gomal University, D.I.K Districts & Civil Divisions of D.I.Khan, Bannu and Kohat. 4. University of Hazara , Mansehra All the District of Hazara Division. 5.

[28] University of the Punjab, Lahore Districts & Civil Divisions of Lahore, Gujranwala, Sargodha, Faisalabad, Sahiwal and Rawalpindi. 6. BahauddinZakriya University, Multan District & Civil Divisions of Mul tan and Dera Ghazi Khan. 7. Islamia University, Bahawalpur All Districts of Bahawalpur Division. 8.

[29] Karachi University All Districts & Civil Division of Karachi. 9. University of Sindh, Hyderabad All Districts & Civil Divisions of Hyderabad, Mirpur Khas and Shaheed Benazirabad. 10. Shah Abdul Latif University, Khairpur Districts & Civil Divisions of Sukkur and Larkana. 11. Quaid -e-Azam University , Islamabad.

[30] Islamabad Capital Territory. 4. Ban against conducting LL.M and Ph.D. in law classes by the Universities / Colleges / institutions that are not allowed to hold LL.B. classes. The universities and institutions that are not recognized and authori sed by the PBC to confer LL.B degree shall not impart legal education to students at LL.M and Ph.D le vels or to admit students to either of such programmes .

[31] The same rule applies to law colleges affiliated to such universities and institutions. 5. Limit on admission to LL.M. and Ph.D. programmes in law and ban on mushroom admissions to these programmes as per criteria of HECP . Admission to LL.M. and Ph.D. programmes by an authori sed law college/ university/institution shall be granted on the criteria laid down by HECP , including , the ceiling on the number of students fixed for admission to such program mes. 6.

[32] Designing of Curriculum for five year LL.B. Prog ramme – annual and semester. The HECP National Curriculum Review Committee alongwith the representative of the PBC sub-committee shall finalize the Curriculum for C.M.A.No.1864 of 2010 -: 9 : five years LL.B programme to be ru n on the basis of an annual or semester system of examination s.

[33] The salient aspects of such Curriculum shall be stated in the detailed reasons. 7. Qualification of faculty (permanent and visiting) at law colleges. The university/Degree Awarding institutio n/law college imparting legal education at the level of LL.B programme shall hire law faculty members/ teachers as under : (i) The Dean Law Faculty/Head of Law Department/Principal of law college shall be Ph.D. in law with 8 years law teaching experience/practic e experience in High Court or Masters Degree in Law with 15 years law teaching experience/practice experience in High Court or a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court or a retired District & Sessions Judge having 5 years of judicial service to his credit ; (ii) At least five permanent/whole time faculty members/ teachers having a Master s degree in law with 5 years law teaching experience/practice experience in High Court or having a Bachelor s degree in law with 10 years law teaching experience/ practi ce experience in High Court; & (iii) There shall be at least five part time/visiting faculty members/ teachers having 5 years standing as Advocate s of High Court. (ii) The above standard ratio of permanent and visiting faculty shall be followed to meet the needs of upto 100 students.

[34] Additional students shall be catered by increasing faculty strength according to the said ratio. 8. Affiliating Universities to constitute separate Affiliating Committees for law colleges within their territorial jurisdiction. Every affiliating university sh all constitute a separate Affiliating Committee for initial and annual inspection of its affiliat e law colleges and to take immediate action against those affiliat e law colleges which are C.M.A.No.1864 of 2010 -: 10 : non-compl iant with the rules framed by the PBC and the applicable rules of the affiliating university itself. 9.

[35] Ban on admission to 3 year LL.B. programme. A five years LL.B. programme shall be introduced in September, 2019. The current three years LL.B. programme shall be phased out and law colleges throughout Pakistan sh all not admit students to their three years LL.B. programme after 31 December 2018. 10. Ban against holding of evening classes Colleges/Universities.

[36] There sh all be a complete ban on evening classes being offered at all law college s/universities across Pakistan . 11. Introduction of Special Equivalence Examination for Law Graduates of foreign universities (by HECP ). No law graduate from any foreign university recognized by the Punjab Bar Council sh all be allowed to take the Law Graduate Assessment Test (LAW –GAT) unless he or she passes a Special Equivalence Examination for law graduates of foreign universities which shall be held periodically by HECP in the following five subjects: 1) Constitution of Pakistan 2) Civil Procedure Code 3) Criminal Procedure Code 4) Qanoon -e-Shahadat 5) Specific Relief Act 12.

[37] Bar Vocational Course : The Provincial/Islamabad Bar Councils may introduce “Two Weeks Bar Vocational Course” during the six months training/pupil lage period that a law graduate intend ing to join the legal profession must undergo for being enrolled as an Advocate for practicing law. The Provincial/ Islamabad Bar Councils may, however, consider and decide modalities for C.M.A.No.1864 of 2010 -: 11 : introducing the said course through respective Federal/ Provincial Ju dicial Academies. 13.

[38] Allocation of Funds in Federal and Provincial Budgets for promotion of legal education: The Federal and Provincial Governments may be canvassed by the PBC and Provincial/ICT Bar Councils for allocation of substantial funds in the annual Federal and Provincial Budgets for promotion of legal education by the PBC. 14.

[39] Salary package and payment of non -practicing allowance for permanent members law faculties: For securing services of competent and experienced law faculty on a permanent b asis, concerned authorities in the Federal and Provincial Governments and the universities and law colleges sh all ensure that a reasonable salary package and non -practicing allowance is paid to the qualified law teachers in the respective universities/ law colleges .

[40] This is necessary for enhancing and maintaining the standard and quality of legal instruction . The HEC P being the apex regulatory authority of the recognized and authorised universities shall play a guiding role in the foregoing regard. 15. Asses sment/Evaluation of Examination : The HEC P shall , in collaboration with universities imparting legal education and the PBC , shall consider the matter of assessment/ evaluation of the e xamination s for LL.B classes exhaustively and make recommendations for up dating and improving the current system of such examination to make it more relevant, practicable and reflective of the real talent and potential of candidates.

[41] C.M.A.No.1864 of 2010 -: 12 : 16. Establishment of autonomous Secretariat/Directorate of Legal Education in the Pakistan Bar Council: For improvement of the standard and quality of legal education in the country , concerted and well planned efforts shall be made to establish a full-fledged and adequately equipped autonomous Secretariat/ Directorate of Legal Education in the PBC .

[42] For this purpose active and meaningful logistic and financial support of the Federal Government shall be secured by the PBC. The Supreme Court of Pakistan shall for this purpose endeavour to project the need for an autonomous Secretariat/ Directorate of Legal Education. 17. Constitution of Implementation/Monitoring Committee: An Implementation/Monitoring Committee for enforcing the directions given herein shall be constituted by the PBC which shall be chaired by Chairman , HECP or a senior functionary nom inated by him . 18.

[43] Immediate closing down of unauthori sed law colleges: A university that neither offer s a law programme nor is recognized by the PBC shall not unauthori sedly grant affiliation to any institution pretending to be a law college. Accordingl y, the following law college s shall immediately be closed down for the reason that their affiliating university /Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University, Benazirabad is not recognized or authorised by the PBC to offer a LL.B programme : (1) Leons Law College, Shahee d Benazirabad. (2) Intelligentia Law College, Moro. (3) Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Law College, NaushahroFeroze. (4) Ali Law College, Sanghar. (5) Shah -e-Ali Law College, Tando Adam. 19.

[44] Disaffiliation of sub -standard law colleges: The following law colleges affiliated to their corresponding universities having been found below the mark and for being outside the territory of C.M.A.No.1864 of 2010 -: 13 : their affiliating u niversity have been recommended by the special Committee of PBC to be disaffiliated: (a) University of Peshawar: (1) Abbot Law College , Abbottabad. (2) Abbott Law College, Mansehra. (3) Ayub Law College, Hairpur. (4) Frontier Law College, Peshawar. (5) Islamia Law College, Peshawar. (6) Jinnah Law College, Peshawar. (7) Justice Law College, Abbottabad. (8) Kohat Law College, Kohat. (9) Mardan Law College, Mardan. (10) Musl im Law College, Swat. (11) Peshawar Law College, Peshawar. . (12) Quaid -e-Azam Institute of Legal Studies, Nowshera. (13) Sanni Islamia Law College, Haripur. (14) Supreme Law College, Peshawar. (15) Swabi Law College, Swabi. (b) University of Hazara, Mansehra : COLES -College of Legal & Ethical Studies, Abbottabad. (c) Gomal University, D.I.

[45] Khan : (1) Danish Kada Law College, Miryan Gate Bannu. (2) Frontier Law College, D.I. Khan. (3) Institute of Legal and Management Sciences, Islamabad. (4) Luqman Law College, D.I. Khan. (d) Univ ersity of Baluchistan, Quetta : (1) Zarghoon Law College, Quetta. (2) Jhalawan Law College, Khuzdar. (e) University of Sindh, Hyderabad : (1) Everest Law College, Hyderabad. (2) SISTEC, Sukkur. (f) Shah Abdul Lateef University, Khairpur : (1) Al-Falah Law College, Kashmo re. (2) Abdul Wahid Soomro Law College, Kashmore. (3) Mirza Khan Law College, Panu Aqil. (4) Mashal Law College, Dahrki, Dahrki. (5) Bilawal Bhutto Law College, Jaccobabad. (6) Faiz Muhammad Sehto College, Kandiaro. (7) Bilawal Bhutto Zardari Law College, Qambhar.

[46] C.M.A.No.1864 of 2010 -: 14 : (g) Bahauddin Zakriya University, Multan : (1) South Punjab Law College, Multan, (2) Professional Law College, Multan, (3) Multan Law College, Multan, (4) Times Institute, Multan, (5) Muhammadan Law College, Multan, (6) Central Law College, Multan, (7) Merit Law College, Multan, (8) Pakistan Law Coll ege, Multan, (9) Sargodha Toppers Law College, Multan, (10) Kaims International Law College, Multan, (11) Ayan Law College, Multan, (12) Sir Syed Law College, Multan, (13) Justice Law & Education College, Multan, (14) International Law College, Multan, (15) Noor Law College, Multan, (16) Quaid -e-Azam Law College, Sahiwal, (17) Montgomery Law College, Sahiwal, (18) Muhammadan Law College, Sahiwal, (19) Command Law College, Sahiwal, (20) Multan Law College, Sahiwal, (21) Johar Law College, Sahiwal, (22) Limit Law College, Sahiwal, (23) Leads Universal Law College, Khanewal, (24) Progres sive Law College, Vehari, (25) Askari Law College, Burewala, (26) Justice Law College, Pakpattan, (27) Pakistan Law College, Pakpattan, (28) Jinnah Law College, Dera Ghazi Khan, (29) Multan Law College, Dera Ghazi Khan, (30) Ghazi Khan Law College, Dera Ghazi Khan, (31) Indus Law College, D era Ghazi Khan, (32) Justice Law & Education College, Muzaffargarh. (h) University of the Punjab, Lahore : (1) Capital Law College, 313 -A, Murree Road, Rawalpindi. (2) Muslim Law College, 89 -A, Satellite Town, Rawalpindi. (3) East & West Education System, Department of Leg al Studies, House# 18, Street # 60, -, Islamabad. (4) Islam Law College, Pasrur Road, Sialkot. (5) The College of Law, G.T.

[47] Road, Gujranwala. (6) Muhammadan Law College, Sharqpur Road, Sheikhupura. (7) Muhammadan Law College, 3 -Km Sargodha Road, Sheikhupura. (8) The Juris ts College of Law Gulberg Town, Opp. Honda Show Room, Lahore Road, Sargodha. (9) Chenab Law College, Jalalpur Jattan Road, Gujrat. (10) The College of Law, Kanjrur Road, Narowal. (11) CIMS School of Law, Lahore. (12) Leads Law College, Township, Lahore. (13) PSE Law College, Nain Sukh, Saqian, Lahore.

[48] C.M.A.No.1864 of 2010 -: 15 : (14) Farabee Law College, Hafizabad. (15) Allama Iqbal Law College, Sialkot. (16) Premier Law College, Gujranwala. (17) Quaid -e-Azam Law College, Okara. (18) National Law College, Lahore. (19) Global Law College, Shahdara, Lahore. (20) Institute of Law, Gulberg, Lahor e. (21) Asian Law College, Gulberg Town, Lahore. (22) City Law College, Allama Iqbal Road, Lahore. (23) Lahore Law College, Gulberg, Lahore. (24) Shams Tabriz Law College, Ferozepur Interchange, Lahore. (25) The National Institute of Legal Studies, Attock. (i) Islamia University, Bahawalpur : (1) Narowal Law College, Narowal, (2) Heritage International College, Hafizabad (3) Cambridge Law College, Wazirabad (4) M.A.

[49] Law College, Gujrat (5) Al-Mizan Institute of Legal Studies, Islamabad (6) Jinnah Muslim Law College, Islamabad (7) Cornelius Law College, Sargodha (8) Zain Law College, Bhakkar (j) Before disaffiliation of any of the above said colleges is implemented , they shall be issued notice of fault or deficiency by the concerned affiliating university thereby granting them opportunity to be heard and being provide d with reason s of the order passed by the concerned university in accordance with its rules of affiliation that are available to law colleges established and functioning within the territorial limits prescribed hereina bove. 20.

[50] Accommodation of law students in eventuality of d isaffiliation of some law colleges: The adjustment of law students who are affected by the disaffiliation of their law colleges shall be pursued by the concerned affiliating universities whic h shall be responsible to assure that such students are enabled to pursue their ongoing LL.B programme till completion.

[51] C.M.A.No.1864 of 2010 -: 16 : 21. Law departments of Universities and law colleges which need improvements in their weak areas within six months : The following law colleges which are run by or affiliated to universities need to overcome weak areas of their LL.B programmes offered by them are given six months for doing so: (a) University of Baluchistan : (1) City Law College, Quetta; (2) University of Baluchistan Law College Peshin Campus (3) School of Law, University of Turbat; and (4) Law College of University of Balochistan Kharan Campus. (b) University of Karachi : (1) Department of Law, University of Karachi. (2) Government Islamia Law College, Karachi. (c) Shaheed Bena zir Bhutto, University, Malir -Karachi : (1) Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto Law College, Malir. (d) University of Sindh : (1) Dinsh Mehran Institute of Law (SMIL), Jamshoro. (e) Shah Abdul Lateef University, Khairpur : (1) Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, College of Law, Khairpur. (2) Qazi Mian Ahmed Law College, Moro. (3) Law College, Ghotki, (4) SDK Law College, Jaccobabad. (f) Federal Urdu University, Karachi : The Federal Urdu University having violated Rules and instructions of the Pakistan Bar Council was firstly placed under suspension and then was de -recognized; it is presently non - functional.

[52] It shall remain suspended till its application for restoration of recognition by the Pakistan Bar Council is decided by the Legal Education Committee of the Pakistan Bar Council. The following campuses have been found lacking: (1) Department of law, Gulshan Campus. (2) Department of law, Abdul -Haq Campus (g) University of the Punjab : (1) The Best Law College, Rawalpindi. (2) Rawalpindi Law College, Rawalpindi.

[53] C.M.A.No.1864 of 2010 -: 17 : (3) Himat -i-Islam Law College, Lahore. (4) Supe rior College of Law, Lahore. (5) Toppers Law College, Gulberg, Lahore. (6) Gujrat Law College, Gujrat. (7) Institute of Legal Studies, Gulberg, Lahore. (8) Faisalabad College of Law, Faisalabad. (9) Muhammad Ali Jinnah Law College, Gujranwala. 22.

[54] Sole recourse before the Su preme Court: Any university or affiliated college that is aggrieved by a final order/ action taken in pursuance of these directions after exhausting any remedy under the University Rules shall avail as the first judicial remedy , appropriate relief from thi s Court. Recourse to any other judicial forum without permission of this Court is ba rred . 5.

[55] All the ancillary Misc. Applications to this matter and listed in the title of this case also stands disposed of accordingly. CHIEF JUSTICE Islamabad , the 31st of August, 2018 . JUDGE JUDGE Irshad Hussain /* NOT APPROVED FOR REPORTING.