Case No: C.P.5/2012
Case Title: Syed Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi v. Federal Government through Secretary Law and others
Subject: Miscelleneous
Judge: MR. JUSTICE JAWWAD S. KHAWAJA
Judgment Date: 18-09-2012
Upload Date: 16-10-2012
Citations: PLD 2012 SC 1054
SC Citations: 2012 SCP 68
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Order-DNC-nd-note.pdf

[1] order. Request is allowed. 2. On behalf of respondent Ms. Farah Naz Asfahani , respected MNA, Mr. Wasim Sajjad, Sr. ASC sought adjourn ment on the last date of hearing to file the reply. Today learned counsel is not in attendance and Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR has made request on his behalf for adjournment .

[2] However, CMA  has been filed by the learned counsel on her behalf, in which in the concluding para categorical ly it has been admitted that “The answering applicant is a natural born citizen of Pakistan as well as of the United States of America by virtue of the permission granted by the Citizenship Act, 1951 as also by the Constitutio n of Pakistan.

[3] The answering applicant took oath at the time she was elected as a Member to be faithful and loyal to Pakistan. He r dual citizenship has not and will not undermine her loyalty to Pakistan.” 3. Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR has stated that this Cour t has no jurisdiction to examine this question. We fail to understand that in such an important matter where elected representatives are holding position in Senate & National Assembly and at the same time they are enjoy ing benefit of dual nationality again st the provision of Article 63(1) (c) of the Constitution, if t his Court, which is bound to preserve Const.P. 3 and defend the Constitution, is not empowered to enforce the fundamental rights of the citizens in terms of Article 18 4(3) of the Constitution, then which C ourt will be competent to do so? 4.

[4] Here it is equally important to note that after her election as Member of National Assembly, she has taken following oath under Article 65 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973: - “I,___________, do solemnly swear that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan: That, as a member of the National Assembly (or Senate), I will perform my functions honestly, to the best of my ability, faithfully, in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, and the law, and the rules of the Assembly (or Senate), and always in the interest of the sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, well -being and prosperity of Pakistan: That I will strive to preserve the Islamic Ideology which is the bas is for the creation of Pakistan.

[5] And that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. 5. At the same time, while acquiring the citizenship of USA she has also taken the oath, which is administered to the imm igrants, who wish to become citizens of USA. Same is reproduced hereinbelow: - “I hereby declare, on oath, that I absolutely and entirely renounce and abjure all allegiance and fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state, or sovereignty, of whom or whi ch I have heretofore been a subject or citizen; that I will support and defend the Constitution and laws of the United States of America against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I will bear arm s on behalf of the United States when required by the law; that I will perform noncombatant service in the Armed Forces of the United States when required by the law; that I will perform work of national importance under civilian direction when required by the law; and that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; so help me God. 6.

[6] Prima facie , admission made by her and contents of the oath, which she had already taken of USA and subsequent thereto Const.P. 4 before the E lection Commission of Pakistan in filing the nomination papers to contest the election and then taking oath under the Constitution , she had not disclosed that as far as citizen ship of Pakistan is concerned, she had already renounced the same and had abjured all allegiance and fidelity to her country where she was b orn etc. as per her oath taken at the time of acquiring citizenship of USA.

[7] In democratic dispensation under the Constitutional provision the Members of the National Assembly and the Senate occupy their positions as chosen representatives of people of Pakistan and if the chosen representatives of Pakistan ha ve already renounced their citizenship, prima facie under the Constitutional dispensation, they had no right to represent them and decide the i ssues of all national importance being the member s of different committees including Defence etc., where all open and secret policies for the betterment of the people of this country/nation are discussed.

[8] Therefore, on having gone through the admission mad e by her and taking into consideration the oath of the allegiance, which she had already taken while acquiring the citizenship of United State of America, we are prima facie of the opinion that it would be in the interest of this country/nation as well as to enforce the Constitution, her membership of the National Assembly is suspended.

[9] She would not be attending the sessions of the National Assembly or any Committee nor she would be participating in the affairs of making policies for this country and the n ation till the final decision of the case. 7. As there is a request on behalf of Rehman Malik, Zahid Iqbal and Ch. Iftikhar Nazir and learned Attorney General has also stated that he needs some time to inquire from the Provincial Const.P. 5 Assemblies with regard t o dual nationa lity, if anyone is holding the same , therefore, case is adjourned to 30th May, 2012.