Case No: C.P.L.A.78-Q/2016
Case Title: Abdul Ghani & others v. Haji Abdul Fatah & another
Subject: Suit for Declaration/Possession
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed
Judgment Date: 01-11-2021
Upload Date: 06-01-2022
Citations: 2022   SCMR  743
SC Citations: 2022 SCP 4
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._78_q_2016.pdf

[1] judgment dated 06.05.2016 passed by the High Court of Balochistan in C.R No.(S)32 of 2013 ) Abdul Ghani & others …Petitioner (s) Versus Haji Abdul Fatah & others …Res pondent (s) For the Petitioner (s): Syed Ayaz Zahoor, Sr.ASC Mr. Gohar Yaqoob Yousafzai, AOR For Respond ent No.1 : Mr. Ghulam Mustafa Buzdar, ASC For Respondent No.2: Mr.

[2] Liaqat Ali Jatoi, ASC Date of hearing: 01.11.2021 . ORDER Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Abdul Fateh, respondent , remained successful throughout downstairs to counter petitioners ’ claim over the suit property . At the center of controversy is Mst. Sahib Khatoon ; she mothered plaintiff/respondent from her wedlock with Muhammad Musa , however, contracted second marriage with Muhammad Raheem after former’s death , survived by Muhammad Ibrahim , issueless , leaving petitioners as distant kinder in the field ; they laid claim over the disputed land , partly on account of their being residual successor s of Muhammad Ibrahim and partly through a sale.

[3] The respondent came up with a Qabin -nama dated 29.6 .1949 (Ex.P -3), purporting transfer of the land as dower to the lady , on the strength Civil Petition No. 78-Q of 20 16 2 whereof, a learned Civil Judge at Dhadar, District Khichi decreed the suit vide judgment and decree dated 31.12.2012, affirmed throughout lastly by a learned Judge -in-Chamber of the High Court of Balochistan vide judgment dated 06.05.2016, vires whereof, are being assailed on a variety of grounds . 2.

[4] Syed Ayaz Zahoor, l earned Sr.ASC, contends that the Courts below ran into concurrence of error inasmuch as plaintiff’s claim, devoid of any proof, in the face of longstanding entries in the revenue record , reflecting multile mutations favouring the petitioner s, there was hardly an occasion to uphold plaintiff’s claim ; adds that Mst.

[5] Sahib Khatoon did not figure anywhere in th e pedigree -table or in the revenue record whereas the petitioners , being rightful owner s, are firmly entrenched in the suit property. None appeared to prove Ex.P -3 and as such acquisition of land partly through sale and partly through inheritance could not have been set aside .

[6] The learned counsel for the respondent has defended the impugned judgments being well reasoned, structured upon an ancient title document protected by the statutory presumption . 3. Heard. Record perused. 4. Position consistently taken by the petitioners, notwithstanding, Qabinnama Ex.P.3, insurmountably stands in impediment to acceptance of their claim , inasmuch as , being a document antedating a period far beyond 30 years , surfacing on the record from respondent’s custody , to be cons idered as proper , by all means , in circumstance s, nullifies the hypothesis of residual bequeathal or the sale as they could not possibly acquire a better title after the land was once invested in Mst.

[7] Sahib Khatoon in pursuance thereto . Though the genuin eness of Qabinnama Ex.P.3 has been disputed at the bar, however, upon our own examination , in the totality of circumstances and admitted nuptial bond between Muhammad Raheem and Mst. Sahib Khatoon , we entertain no manner of doubt that the disputed land was parted by the former as a dower to her better half as far back as on 29.6.1949 on an official stamp paper .

[8] Any manipulation, given the timeframe, is inconceivable , even by the best of foretellers . Consideration of Qabinnama Ex.P.3 in favour of the respond ent by the Civil Petition No. 78-Q of 20 16 3 courts below , an exercise found by us, most prudent as well as within the remit of law , calls for no interference.