Case No: C.P.L.A.185/2024
Case Title: Sanam Javaid Khan (Presently confined in Kot Lakhpat Jail, Lahore) through her attorney Jawad Javaid Khan v. Election Appellate Tribunal, Punjab and others
Subject: Election-National Assembly/Rejection of Nomination Papers
Judge: Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar
Judgment Date: 26-01-2024
Upload Date: 26-01-2024
Citations: NA
SC Citations: 2024 SCP 37
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._185_2024.pdf

[1] judgment dated 12.01.2024 passed by the Lahore High Court, Lahore in W.P. No..) Sanam Javaid Khan (Presently confined in Kot Lakhpat Jail, Lahore) through her attorney Jawad Javaid Khan … Petitioner Vs Election Appellate Tribunal, Punjab and others … Respondent s For the Petitioner : Mr. Shazib Masu d, ASC Mr.

[2] Moiz Tariq, ASC Assisted by: M/s Mian Ali Ashfaq, A. Ahad Khokhar, M. Fiaz Kandwal, Advocates Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR For ECP : Mr. Zafar Iqbal, Spl. Secy. Mr. M. Arshad, D.G. (Law) Mr. Mansoor Akhtar Sherwani, DG (Political Finance) Mr. Khur ram Shahzad, Addl. Dir. Mr. Falak Shar, Legal Consultant (On C ourt’s call) Date of Hearing : 26.01.2024 ORDER Munib Akhtar, J.: We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner as also the learned DG (Law) and learned DG (Political Finan ce). 2.

[3] For detailed reasons to be recorded later and subject to such amplification and/or explanation therein as may be deemed appropriate, this leave petition is converted into an appeal and allowed. The impugned judgment of the learned High Court as we ll C.P.L.A. -:2:- as the orders of the fora below are set aside with the result that the nomination papers of the petitioner, now appellant, for NA -120 (Lahore) are deemed accepted and h er name is deemed included in the final list of candidates for the General Elections of 2024.

[4] This candidate shall immediately and forthwith, and it shall be the duty of the Election Commission to ensure that this is done, be allocated an election symbol. 3. The name of the candidate and h er election symbol must appear on the ballot pape rs used in and for the general election to the constituency aforementioned and the said election for this constituency must be held on 08.02.2024, as scheduled.