Case No: C.P.57/2016
Case Title: Barrister Zafar Ullah Khan v. Federation of Pakistan etc
Subject: U/A 184(3)
Judge: MR. JUSTICE MIAN SAQIB NISAR, HCJ
Judgment Date: 04-07-2018
Upload Date: 18-09-2018
Citations: 2018 SCMR 1621
SC Citations: 2018 SCP 106
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Const.P._57_2016.pdf

[1] order dated 24.8.2016 passed in C.M.A.No. ) AND CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.24 OF 2018 (Under Article 184(3) of the Constitution) AND HUMAN RIGHTS CASE NO.30998 -S OF 2018 (Regarding shortage of water supply in Karachi ) AND HUMAN RIGHTS CASE NO.50363 -P OF 2010 (In the matter reg arding acute shortage of water supply in Karachi ) AND CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.37 OF 2018 (Under Article 184(3) of the Constitution) AND CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.3 8 OF 2018 (Under Article 184(3) of the Constitution) Const.P.: Barrister Zafar ullah Khan Vs.

[2] Federation of Pakistan etc. C.M.A.681 -K/2018: CMA for amendment in Const itution Petition C.R.P.: Engineers Study Forum (Regd.), through its President Mian Fazal Ahmad Vs. Federation of Pakistan, etc. Constitution Petition No.57 of 20 16 etc. -: 2 :- Const.P.: Agha Qasi m Raza Vs. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary Ministry of Water Islamabad and others H.R.C.30998 -S/18: In the matter regarding acute shortage of water supply in Karachi H.R.C.50363 -P/10: Application by Malik Abdul Latif Khokhar Const.P.: Rana Ilamuddin Ghazi Vs.

[3] Federation of Pakistan, through Secretary Cabinet Division, Islamabad and others Const.P.: Sutlej Ravi Water Forum through its Chairman Zia Shahid Vs. Federation of Pakistan through Secretar y Interior, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad. In attendance: For the petitioner(s)/ applicant(s): Barrister Zafarullah Khan, ASC (In Const.P.) Nemo (In Const.P. 8) Nemo (In Const.P.) Nemo (In C.R.P.) Dr.

[4] Khalid Ranjha, Sr. ASC (In Const.P. ) Malik Abdul Latif Khokhar, ASC (In H.R.C.50363 -P/2010) Nemo (In C.M.A.) For Federation: Mr. Khalid Jawed Khan, Attorney General for Pakistan Syed Nayyar Abbas Rizvi, Addl.A.G.P. Assisted by: Barrister Asad Rahim Khan For Provinces: Mr. Razzaq A. Mirza, Addl.A.G.

[5] Punjab Ms. Sehar Chaudhry, Law Officer, Irrigation, Punjab Mr. Shehryar Qazi, Addl.A.G. Sindh Mr. Jamal Mustafa Syed, Secy. Irrigation, Sindh Mr. Khalid Mehmood, M.D. KWSB, Sindh Mr. Ayaz Swati, Addl.A.G. Balochistan Barrister Qasim Wadood, Addl.A.G. KPK Constitution Petition No.57 of 20 16 etc. -: 3 :- For LJCP: Dr.

[6] Muhammad Rahim Awan, Secretary On Court’s call: Mr. Shams -ul-Mulk, ex -Chairman WAPDA Mr. Zafar Mehmood, ex -Chairman WAPDA Mr. Mujeeb -ur-Rehman Pirzada, ASC On Court’s notice: For M/o Planning & Development: Mr. Shoaib Ahmed Siddiqui, Secretary Mr. Naseer Ahmed Jillani, Sr. Chief (Water) Mr. Arshad Ali, Joint Secretary For M/o Water Resources: Mr.

[7] Shumail Ahmed Khawaja, Secretary Syed Muhammad Mehar Ali Shah, Joint Secretary/Commissioner Indus Water For M/o Finance: Mr. Arif Ahmed Khan, Secretary For M/o Climate Change: Mr. Yousaf Naseem Khokhar, Secretary For WAPDA: Lt. Gen. (R) Muzammil Hussain, Chairman Mr. M. Babar, Deputy Director Mr. Shahzad Asif, Director Date of hearing: 4.7.2018 ORDER MIAN SAQIB NISAR, CJ. - For the reasons to be recorded later in elaboration of this short order , we dispose of these matters in the following terms : 1.

[8] That the need for water reservoirs is not only expedient but also sine qua non for th e survival of the people and economy of Pakistan . All those present in the Court including officials of the various departments and expert s on the subject are unanimous in this regard. They are also unanimous on the point that according to the decision of the Council of Common Interest the Diamer Bhasha Dam and pursuant to the approval of the ECNEC both the said and Mohmand Dam must be built on urgent basis by the Federal Government and in this regard there is no dispute or discord of any nature amongst the Provinces ; 2.

[9] That right to life is a fundamental right and without water there can be no existence of life. The establishment of water Constitution Petition No.57 of 20 16 etc. -: 4 :- reservoirs is therefore not a question of just quality of life rather the very existence thereof. T herefore, in terms o f the provisions of Article 184(3) of the Constitution read with Article 9 and as guardian s of the fundamental rights of the people of Pakistan, this Court has the jurisdiction to issue necessary directions to the Government for the practical enforcement o f the primordial right to life.

[10] Accordingly, we direct the Federal and Provincial Government s, WAPDA and all the Executive Authorities in Pakistan who are responsible or have nexus/connection with the building of the afore -said dams and all matters connect ed thereto , to take all necessary steps for the commencement of construction and early completion of these dams .

[11] A comprehensive report in this regard with detailed timelines and milestone s shall be submitted to this Court within a period of t hree weeks by the Committee formed herein below ; 3. For the construction of these dams and also for oversight of execution of their works, we hereby constitute an Implementation Committee headed by the Chairman WAPDA and for the time being comprising experts and offic ials of the Federal and KPK Government s including the following persons: (i) Additional Secretary (Budget), Finance Division, Federal Government ; (ii) Joint Secretary, Water Resources Division, Federal Government ; (iii) Joint Secretary , PM Office (to be nominated by Se cretary to PM); (iv) Senior Chief (Water), Planning Division , Federal Government; (v) Chief Secretary Gilgit -Baltistan ; (vi) Senior Member Board of Revenue, KPK (vii) Additional Chief Secretary (Development), KPK; (viii) The Committee can co -opt any member s/ expert s.

[12] Constitution Petition No.57 of 20 16 etc. -: 5 :- 4. Under the provisions of Article 78 of the Constitution, any funds deposited in the Public Account of the Feder ation can be dedicated for a specified project or purpose. We therefore direct the establishment of an account, for the time being in the name of the R egistrar of the Supreme Court of Pakistan , for collecting funds donated by the people of Pakistan for the construction and establishment of the aforementioned dam s; 5.

[13] In the foregoing behalf we accordingly appeal to the Nation for making its contribution s, whether in the shape of foreign currency or in Pakistani rupees , directly to the said account. The funds in the said account shall be utilized solely for the construction and establishment of the aforementioned dams and shall for the time being be opera ted under the orders of this Court on the recommendations of the Implementation Committee.

[14] It is made clear that the funds in this account shall not under any circumstance or for any reason be diverted or utilized for any purpose other than the constructio n of the afore -noted dams. For avoidance of doubt it is directed that no question s shall be asked by any authority or department including , but not limited to the tax authorities , relating to the source of funds contributed to the afore -noted account.

[15] The utilization of the said funds shall be subject to audit as per directions of this Court . CHIEF JUSTICE JUDGE JUDGE JUDGE Islamabad , the 4th of July , 2018 Waqas Naseer/*