Case No: C.P.L.A.1289/2020
Case Title: Haseen Ullah v. Mst. Naheed Begum & others
Subject: Family/Maintenance Allowance
Judge: Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah
Judgment Date: 23-11-2021
Upload Date: 03-08-2022
Citations: PLD 2022 SC 686
SC Citations: 2022 SCP 239
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._1289_2020.pdf

[1] JUDGMENT Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. - “This is a male -dominated society; men since ages have always been more concerned about their rights by using religion for their own convenience, especially in matrimonial matters, but forget religion when it comes to their duty and o bligation towards their women”1, this seems to hold true in the present case.

[2] This case where a husband disputes the payment of maintenance and dower to his wife, provides an occasion to underline the principles, duties and obligation s of a husband towards his wife under the Islamic law with regard to maintenance and dower . 2. The respondent, Naheed Begum, instituted a suit, in the Family Court, Tangi Charsadda, for recovery of her dower i.e.,1- Jarab2 of agriculture land (mentioned in column No. 16 of her Nikahnama) and maintenance for herself and her five minor children (three daughters and two sons ) against the petitioner , her husband , who had contracted a second marriage and was living with his second wife.

[3] The Family Co urt decreed the suit to the extent of her claim for maintenance of her minor children, but reject ed her claim s 1 Sabiha Hussain, Unfolding the reality of Islamic rights of women: Mahr and maintenance rights , Pakistan Journal of Women Studies: Alam -e-Niswan 20, No. 2 (2013). 2 Equals to 4 -Kanal CP No. 2 for recovery of her dower and maintenance .

[4] The District Court dismissed h er appeal, maintaining the judgment of the Family Court. She then invoke d the constitutional jurisdiction of the Peshawar H igh Court, under Article 199 of the C onstitution of Pakistan, for redress of her grievance against the judgments of the Courts below. The High Court allowed her constitution petition, reversed the judgment s of the Courts below, and decreed her claim s of dower and maintenance, vide its judgment dated 09.03.2020.

[5] It is against this judgment of the High Court that the petitioner , Haseen Ullah, has filed the present petition for leave to appeal. 3. We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner in detail and with his able assistance, perused the record of the case minutely. 4. The High Court and the Courts below have differ ed on interpreting the entries of columns No.13 to 16 of the Nikahnama of the p arties , which are reproduced hereunder for ready reference: ٣١ 㢻 ر㷨 呅 (1) 㤑 رات 技 ز 㷨 嬸Ⳣ 䪬ᠢ ت⡜ 㲡䆨 愡ا ᩶⡜ ار密 ᎛رو ٤١ ّ ǌ Ҿ吴 㦎 اور嵗 Ŋǌ ťّ ƍŬ 㢻 ر㦎 㷨 呅 ٥١ 䅏 㷩 ادا࿀ 㡃吴 㺸 دى⹢ ▗ 㨗 㥃 呅 徉آ ر㟣 㨵 ᠢ 䅏 㷩 㽻ا 後ᚓ ٦١ 弥㱾 啵 ض㑴 㺸 ▗ 㩴 㺸 اس 徉 呅 رےᄯ 徉آ اد弹᱑ اد弹᱑ اسᠢ 嵗 䅋 دى㲁 嵗 扳د اور ┍اエ 㷨 嵗 弥ຩ ㋄ ู䰮 㺸 愘㘄 Ṏ 㤑 㷨 اس۔ (2) 愡اᳩ ۔㭶 دى⛪ د垌 آ܉د㪢 م૭ ㇒ب ارا English translation : 13 Amount of dower: (1) 7 -tola gold ornaments valuing Rs.1,60,000/ - 14 How much of the dower is mu’ajjal (prompt) and how much is ghair mu’ajjal (deferred): [blank] 15 Whether any portion of the dower was paid at the time of marriage, If so, how much: Almost [all] 16 Whether any pro perty was given in lieu of the whole or any portion of the dower, if so, its specification and price agreed to between the parties: (2) 1 -Jarab l and in Kashmirabad near Khadi Ka lay The Family Court observed that t he dower mentioned in column No.16 of the Nikahnama was payab le only if the dower specifi ed in CP No. 3 column No.13 had not been paid, and as the respondent admitted to have received the dower of seven tola gold ornaments specified in column No.13, she was not entitled to claim the dow er mentioned in column No.16 of the Nikahnama .

[6] The District Court, in appeal, endorsed this finding with the observation that four Kanal agriculture land mentioned in column No.16 was to be given only in lieu of seven tola gold ornaments specifi ed as dower in column No.13 of the Nikahnama , which the respondent had admittedly received. The High Court has held that the facts and circumstances of the case clearly show that the dower mentioned in column No.16 was in addition to, not in lieu of, the one specified in column No.13 of the Nikahnama. 5.

[7] We find that the Family Court and District Court have acted on what the heading of column 16 prima facie suggest, i.e., the ment ioning of any property that is given “in lieu of the whole or any portion of the dower”, without ascertaining the intent of the parties. This approach of the said Courts is not in consonance with the settled principles of construction of contracts.

[8] Needles s to say that Nikahnama is a deed of marriage -contract entered into between the parties, husband and wife, and the contents of its clauses/columns, like clauses of other contracts, are to be construed and interpreted in the light of intention of parties .3 The High Court has rightly ascertai ned the intent of the parties for mentioning four Kanal agriculture land in column No.16 of the Nikahnama , irrespective of its placement in a particular column.

[9] It is a matter of common knowledge that the persons who sole mnize Nikah or the Nikah Registrars are mostly laymen, not well -versed of legal complications that may aris e from mentioning certain terms agreed to between the parties in any particular column of the Nikahnama. Therefore, it becomes the foremost duty of c ourts dealing with disputes arising out of the terms entered in the Nikahnama , to ascertain the true intent of the parties and give effect thereto accordingly , and not be limited and restricted by the form of the heading of the particular column s wherein those terms are mentioned . 6.

[10] We, on our own independent appraisal of the facts and circumstances of the case, agree with the finding of the High Court, 3 Abdul Haq v. WAPDA 1991 SCMR 1436 ; HBFC v. Shahinshah Humayun 1992 SCMR 19; Sandoz Limited v. Federation 1995 SCMR 1431 CP No. 4 which is not only supported by the contents of the compromise deed dated 18.12.2012 executed by both the petitioner and the respondent, but also by the contents of the entries of column s No. 13 and 16 of the Nikahnama.

[11] The figures (1) and (2) mentioned in columns No.13 and 16 respectively leave little room to guess what the true intention of the parties w as; they clearly show that both (1) seven tola gold ornaments mentioned as dower in column No.13 and (2) four Kanal agriculture land mentioned in column No.16 were the dower.

[12] The figures (1) and (2) need not be mentioned if only one of them was to be payab le as dower. Further, seven tola gold ornaments and four Kanal agriculture land have no parity of value to be agreed as an alternate of each other. Therefore, the finding of the High Court on the issue of dower is perfectly correct and is in consonance wit h the principles of law enunciated by this Court in the cases of Asma Ali4 and Yasmeen Bibi .5 7.

[13] As for the claim of the respondent for her maintenance, the Family Court and the District Court held that since the respondent is not residing with the petitioner she is not entitled to maintenance. The High Court has overturned these findings and held the respondent entitled to receive maintenance fr om the petitioner, while observing that the respondent sh owed her willingness to go with the petitioner du ring hearing the petition, but the petitioner, who had contracted second marriage, flatly refused to take her to his house.

[14] We find nothing wrong in the decision of the High Court. A wife who is willing to, but cannot, discharge her marital obligations for no fault of her own, rather is prevented to do so by any act or omission of her husband is legally entitled to receive her due maintenance from her husband, and the latter cannot benefit from his own wrong. 8.

[15] As per Section 2 of the West Pakistan Musli m Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act 1962 , the questions regarding dower are to be decided, subject to the provisions of any enactment for the time being in force, in accordance with Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) in cases where the parties are Muslims.

[16] It hardly needs reiterating that the Holy Quran and the Sunnah of the Prophet of Islam (pbuh) 4 Asma Ali v. Maso od Sajjad PLD 2011 SC 221. 5 Yasmeen Bibi v. Ghazanfar Khan P L D 2016 SC 613. CP No. 5 are the primary sources of Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) in Islam. The payment of dower (mahr ) at the time of marriage was a customary practice in Arabia before the advent of Islam , but it was paid to the guardians of the bride, such as, her father or other male relative , as bride-price and the bride herself did not receive a penny of it.

[17] This practice of paying dower as bride -price to the male guardians of the bride was reformed by the Islam through the Quranic command s6 of paying dower as the bride -wealth to the bride herself , who becomes the sole owner of it . The Holy Qur an also forbids the Believers to take back anything from their wives out of the paid dower even it be a great sum .7 In Islam, the payment of dower to bride at marriage is an obligation that is imposed by the God Almighty , and is thus an intrinsic and integral part of a Muslim marriage.

[18] It is considered an obligatory bridal gift offere d by the bridegroom to the bride graciously as a manifestation of his love and respect for her. Some Muslim men compliment the obligatory bridal gift, dower, with other gifts and presents as per their financial capacity.8 9. Under the Islamic law a wife’s right to be maintained by her husband is absolute so long as she remains faithful to him and discharge s, or is willing to discharge, her own matrimonial obligations .

[19] A Muslim husband is bound to mainta in his wife even if no term in this regard is agreed to between them at the time of marriage or she can maintain herself out of her own resources9. The Holy Quran10 enunciates that m en are the protectors and maintainers of women because the God Almighty has given the one more strength than the other and because they support them from their money .

[20] And the Holy Prophet of Islam (pbuh) has instructed Muslim men to provide their wives with maintenance in a fitting manner11 and declared it to be the right of the women12. 6 Al-Quran, Chapter 4 verses 4, 24, 25, Chapter 5 verse 5, Chapter 33 verse 50, Chapter 60 verse 10. 7 Al-Quran, Chapter 2, verse 229 and Chapter 4 verse 20. 8 Tirkey, S., A critical analysis of dower (mahr) in theory and practice in British India through court records from 1800 to 1939 [Master's Thesis, the American University in Cairo].

[21] AUC Knowledge Fountain (2020). 9 Azizah Mohd, et al., Muslim Wifes Rights To Maintenance: Husbands Duty To Maintain A Working Wife In Islamic Law (2010) 18 IIUMLJ 103 . 10 Al-Quran, Chapter 4 verses 34. 11 Imam Muslim, Sahih Muslim , Translation by Abdal Hamid Saddiqi, Kitab al -Haj, Vol. II, pp. 615 - 616. 12 Al-Mubarakpuri, Tuhfat al -Ahwadhi bi Sharh Jamia Altarmidhi , Second Edition, Vol. 4, Maktabat al-Salafiyyah, Medina (1965), p. 326.

[22] CP No. 6 10. We note that the petitione r, instead of paying the mainten ance and giving the dower to the respondent willingly and graciously, has been evading his legal as well as moral obligation on one and the other pretext, as he first totally denied to have agreed to, and mentioning in Nikahnama, the term of giving four Kanal agriculture land as dower to the respondent, in his written statement, and later started opposing it with the argument that it was an alternate to be given only if seven tola gold ornaments mentioned in column No.13 had not been paid.

[23] It i s regrettable that the petitioner , an educated person who belongs to the noble profession of teaching, does not realize his obligation to pay the dower agreed upon by him at the time of marriage with the respondent, not only under t he law of the land but also under the commandments of the God Almighty given in the Holy Quran to persons who proclaim to be Muslim.

[24] He has by his such conduct forced his wife to fight for her right to receive her maintenance and dower in four courts, from the Family Court to the Supreme Court. His such conduct is highly deplorable. 11. For the above reasons, we find the present petition baseless and vexatious and therefore dismiss it with costs throughout.