Case No: C.P.L.A.181/2023
Case Title: Aziz Ahmad and others v. Mst. Musarat & another
Subject: Succession Certificate/Succession Certificate
Judge: Mr. Justice Shakeel Ahmad
Judgment Date: 09-04-2025
Upload Date: 02-05-2025
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2025 SCP 157
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/c.p._181_2023.pdf

[1] judgment dated 31.10.20 22 passed by the Peshawar High Court, Mingora Bench in Civil Revision No. 371-M of 20 20) Aziz Ahmad and others …Petitioner (s) Versus Mst. Musarat …Respondent(s) For the Petitioner (s) : Mr. Asghar Ali, ASC Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR For R espondent (s) : N.R Date of Hearing : 09.04.2025 JUDGMENT Shakeel Ahmad, J .- This Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal filed under Article 185 (3) of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, arise s out of the judgment dated 31-10-2022 passed by the learned Single Judge of the Peshawar High Court, Mingora Bench, whereby Civil Revision No. 371 -M of 2020 filed by the respondent, Mst.

[2] Musarat, was allowed and the concurrent findings of the courts below denying her share in the inheritance of the estate of Shah Bakht Rawan (hereinafter referred to as the “deceased ”) were set aside. 2. It will be first convenient to briefly state the factual background against which the instant petition arise s.

[3] The dispute concerns the inheritance to the estate of the deceased. The petitioners are the legal heirs of the deceased, while the respondent, Mst. Musarat is his widow. It is an undisputed fact that the respondent was married to the deceased in accordance with Muslim rites; however, during his lifetime, the deceased sent a divorce deed bearing No. 372 dated 27 -8-2018 to the respondent through p ost, thereby divorcing her.

[4] Thereafter, the deceased passed away on 3-10-2018, prior to the expiry of the ninety days iddat period . After his death, the mother of the deceased, Mst. Bakht Begum, along with the children of the deceased, filed an application under Section 372 of the Succession Act, C.P.L.A.181 of 2023 2 1925, seeking a succession certificate in respect of the deceased’s estate.

[5] It was pleaded that the respondent, having been divorced before the death of the deceased, had ceased to be his legal heir and was therefore not entitled to inherit from his estate. The respondent, however, filed an application seeking impleadment based on her status as the widow of the deceased. Her application was allowed, and she was arrayed as a respondent.

[6] She contested the petition by filing her written reply, upon which, and in the light of the divergent pleadings of the parties, issues were framed. After a full -fledged trial, the learned Civil Judge/Guardian Judge Swat, vide judgment dated 24 -1-2020, granted succession certificate in favour of the other legal heirs, being mother and the children of the deceased, but declined to grant any share to the respondent on the grounds that she stood divorced before the death of the deceased.

[7] Being aggrieved of the same, the respondent preferred an appeal which was dismissed vide judgment dated 13 -11-2020. She then filed a Civil Revision before the Peshawar High Court, Mingora Bench, after providing right of audience to both the parties , the High Court, vide judgment dated 31 -10-2022, held that succession opens immediately upon the death of the deceased, and as on that date only two months and four days had passed since the pronouncement of divorce and it had not yet become effective , therefore, the respondent being the deceased’s widow was entitled to inherit from his estate, setting aside the concurrent judgments of the courts below.

[8] The petitioners have now approached this Court seeking leave to appeal against the judgment of the High Court. 3. Learned Counsel for the petitioners contended that the divorce deed executed on 27 -8-2018 took immediate effect, thereby terminating the marital status of the couple and ruling out any possibility for mediation or reconciliation, as a result the respondent ceased to be the wife of the deceased , and therefore , is not entitled to inherit from his estate. 4.

[9] Having heard the learned Counsel for the petitioners, the pivotal question that emerges here is whether a wife, divorced through Talaq -e-Biddat is entitled to inherit her deceased husband’s estate if his death occurs during her iddat period. C.P.L.A.181 of 2023 3 5. Marriage under Islamic law is a civil contract and not a sacrament.

[10] It is ordained by Allah in the Holy Quran. It is designed to ensure comfort, companionship, and mutual love between spouses. The husband bears a solemn and continuing obligation to treat his wife with love, compassion, and respect, and to provide her with maintenance, including food and clothing, throughout the subsistence of the marriage, as reflected in the last sermon of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (PBUH).

[11] The Holy Quran never intended for a divorce to act as a device of instant magic whereby the marital bond is severed immediately. A woman, who enters into the sacred bond of marriage with the legitimate expectation of sharing in all aspects of her husband’s life, its joys, sorrows, burdens, and blessings cannot be discarded whimsically nor should she be made to vanish from the matrimonial home and the heart of her husband through a mechanical invocation of divorce.

[12] In line with this sacred view of marriage, Islamic jurisprudence provides a structured and deliberate process of its dissolution. ‘ Talaq’, namely divorce at the instance of the husband, is generally categorised into three forms: Talaq -e-Ahsan, Talaq -e-Hasan, and Talaq -e-Biddat or Talaq -e-Bain. The first two forms of divorce are expressly recognised and sanctioned by the Quran and Hadith, requiring reflection and waiting periods, thereby offering a room for reconciliation.

[13] In contrast, Talaq - e-Biddat or triple divorce is neither endorsed by the Quran nor supported by the Hadith. The very term ‘Biddat’ denotes innovation and indicates that this form of divorce was a post-Prophetic development. While early Islamic practice, as reported by Ibn Abbas, treated three pronouncements of divorce made at one time as a single revocable divorce during the lifetime of the Prophet (PBUH), the tenure of the first Caliph, and the initial years of the second Caliph, the practice was altered during the Caliphate of Hazrat Umar (RA) as a disciplinary measure to curb the misuse of divorce.1 Thus, Talaq -e-Biddat might be regarded as a form of talaq not rooted in divine command, but rather an administrative necessity of earlier times. 6.

[14] The commandments of Allah regarding Talaq are set out explicitly in Surah Al Baqra (2:226 -232) and Sura -Al- 1 Chapter 4 of the Muslim Law of Divorce by K.N. Ahm ed (1984) C.P.L.A.181 of 2023 4 Talaq (65:1), which are clear and unequivocal. Additionally, Sura-Al-Ahzab (33:49) and Sura l-An-Nisa (4:35) are also relevant herein.

[15] The directives contained in these verses are clear, catego rical, and leave no room for ambiguity. The mandate of the Holy Quran is reproduced below, translated into English and Urdu: (2:226) ﻟِﻠﱠﺬِﯾۡﻦَ ﯾُﺆۡﻟُﻮۡنَ ﻣِﻦۡ ﻧِّﺴَﺎٓﺋِﮩِﻢۡ ﺗَﺮَﺑﱡﺺُ اَرۡﺑَﻌَۃِ اَﺷۡﮩُﺮٍ ۚ ◌ ﻓَﺎِنۡ ﻓَﺎٓءُوۡ ﻓَﺎِنﱠ ﱣَ ဃ ﻏَﻔُﻮۡرٌ رﱠ ﺣِﯿۡﻢٌ Those who swear not to have intercourse with their wives must wait for four months.

[16] If they change their mind, then Allah is certainly All -Forgiving, Most Merciful. ان ﻟﻮﮔﻮں ﮐﮯ ﻟﺌﮯ ﺟﻮ اﭘﻨﯽ ﺑﯿﻮﯾﻮں ﺳﮯ ﺗﻌﻠﻘﺎت ﻗﺎﺋﻢ ﻧہ ﮐﺮﻧﮯ ﮐﯽ ﻗﺴﻢ ﮐﮭﺎﺗﮯ ﮨﯿﮟ ﭼﺎر ﻣﮩﯿﻨﮯ ﺗﮏ اﻧﺘﻈﺎر ﮐﺮﻧﺎ )ﺟﺎﺋﺰ( ﮨﻮ ﮔﺎ۔ ﭘﺲ اﮔﺮ وه رﺟﻮع ﮐﺮ ﻟﯿﮟ ﺗﻮ ﷲ ﯾﻘﯿﻨﺎً ﺑﮩﺖ ﺑﺨﺸﻨﮯ واﻻ )اور( ﺑﺎرﺑﺎر رﺣﻢ ﮐﺮﻧﮯ واﻻ ﮨﮯ۔ (2:227) وَاِنۡ ﻋَﺰَﻣُﻮا اﻟﻄﱠﻼَقَ ﻓَﺎِنﱠ ﱣَ ဃ ﺳَﻤِﯿۡﻊٌ ﻋَﻠِﯿۡﻢٌ And if they decide upon divorce, then surely, Allah is All-Hearing, All -Knowing. اور اﮔﺮ وه طﻼق ﮐﺎ ﻗﻄﻌﯽ ﻓﯿﺼﻠہ ﮐﺮ ﻟﯿﮟ ﺗﻮ ﯾﻘﯿﻨﺎً ﷲ ﺑﮩﺖ ﺳﻨﻨﮯ واﻻ )اور( داﺋﻤﯽ ﻋﻠﻢ رﮐﮭﻨﮯ واﻻ ﮨﮯ۔ (2:228) وَاﻟۡﻤُﻄَﻠﱠﻘٰﺖُ ﯾَﺘَﺮَﺑﱠﺼۡﻦَ ﺑِﺎَﻧۡﻔُﺴِﮩِﻦﱠ ﺛَﻠٰﺜَۃَ ﻗُﺮُوۡٓءٍ ؕ ◌ وَﻻَ ﯾَﺤِﻞﱡ ﻟَﮩُﻦﱠ اَنۡ ﯾﱠﮑۡﺘُﻤۡﻦَ ﻣَﺎ ﺧَﻠَ قَ ﱣُ ဃ ﻓِﯽۡۤ اَرۡﺣَﺎﻣِﮩِﻦﱠ اِنۡ ﮐُﻦﱠ ﯾُﺆۡﻣِﻦﱠ ﱣِ ๡ﺑِﺎ وَاﻟۡﯿَﻮۡمِ اﻻٰۡﺧِﺮِ ؕ ◌ وَﺑُﻌُﻮۡﻟَﺘُﮩُﻦﱠ اَﺣَﻖﱡ ﺑِﺮَدِّ ﮨِﻦﱠ ﻓِﯽۡ ذٰﻟِﮏَ اِنۡ اَرَادُوۡۤا اِﺻۡﻼَﺣًﺎ ؕ ◌ وَﻟَﮩُﻦﱠ ﻣِﺜۡﻞُ اﻟﱠﺬِیۡ ﻋَﻠَﯿۡﮩِﻦﱠ ﺑِﺎﻟۡﻤَﻌۡﺮُوۡفِ ۪ ◌ وَﻟِ ﻟﺮِّﺟَﺎلِ ﻋَﻠَﯿۡﮩِﻦﱠ دَرَﺟَۃٌ ؕ ◌ ﱣُ ဃ وَ ﻋَﺰِﯾۡﺰٌ ﺣَﮑِﯿۡﻢٌ And the divorced women shall wait concerning themselves for three courses; and it is not lawful for them that they conceal what Allah has created in their wombs, if they believe in Allah and the Last Day; and their husbands have the greater right to take them back during that period, provided they desire reconciliation.

[17] And they (the women) have rights similar to those (of men) over them in equity; but men have a rank above them. And Allah is Mighty, Wise. اور ﻣﻄﻠّﻘہ ﻋﻮرﺗﻮں ﮐﻮ ﺗﯿﻦ ﺣﯿﺾ ﮐﯽ ﻣﺪت ﺗﮏ اﭘﻨﮯ آپ ﮐﻮ روﮐﮯ رﮐﮭﻨﺎ ﮨﻮﮔﺎ۔ اور ان ﮐﮯ ﻟﺌﮯ ﺟﺎﺋﺰ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ، اﮔﺮ وه ﷲ اور ﯾﻮم آﺧﺮت ﭘﺮ اﯾﻤﺎن ﻻﺗﯽ ﮨﯿﮟ ﮐہ وه اس ﭼﯿﺰ ﮐﻮ ﭼﮭﭙﺎﺋﯿﮟ ﺟﻮ ﷲ ﻧﮯ ان ﮐﮯ رِﺣﻤﻮں ﻣﯿﮟ ﭘﯿﺪا ﮐﺮدی ﮨﮯ۔ اور اس ﺻﻮرت ﻣﯿﮟ ان ﮐﮯ ﺧﺎوﻧﺪ زﯾﺎده ﺣﻘﺪار ﮨﯿﮟ ﮐہ اﻧﮩﯿﮟ واﭘﺲ ﻟﮯ ﻟﯿﮟ اﮔﺮ وه اﺻﻼح ﭼﺎﮨﺘﮯ ﮨﯿﮟ۔ اور اُن )ﻋﻮرﺗﻮں( ﮐﺎ دﺳﺘﻮر ﮐﮯ ﻣﻄﺎﺑﻖ )ﻣَﺮدوں ﭘﺮ( اﺗﻨﺎ ﮨﯽ ﺣﻖ ﮨﮯ ﺟﺘﻨﺎ )ﻣَﺮدوں ﮐﺎ( اُن ﭘﺮ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺣﺎﻻﻧﮑہ ﻣَﺮدوں ﮐﻮ ان ﭘﺮ اﯾﮏ ﻗﺴﻢ ﮐﯽ ﻓﻮﻗﯿﺖ ﺑﮭﯽ ﮨﮯ۔ اور ﷲ ﮐﺎﻣﻞ ﻏﻠﺒہ واﻻ )اور( ﺣﮑﻤﺖ واﻻ ﮨﮯ۔ (2:229) اَﻟﻄﱠﻼَقُ ﻣَﺮﱠﺗٰﻦِ ۪ ◌ ﻓَﺎِﻣۡﺴَﺎکٌۢ ﺑِﻤَﻌۡﺮُوۡفٍ اَوۡ ﺗَﺴۡﺮِﯾۡﺢٌۢ ﺑِﺎِﺣۡﺴَﺎنٍ ؕ ◌ وَﻻَ ﯾَﺤِﻞﱡ ﻟَﮑُﻢۡ اَ نۡ ﺗَﺎۡﺧُﺬُوۡا ﻣِﻤﱠﺎۤ اٰﺗَﯿۡﺘُﻤُﻮۡﮨُﻦﱠ ﺷَﯿۡﺌًﺎ اِﻻﱠۤ اَنۡ ﯾﱠﺨَﺎﻓَﺎۤ اَﻻﱠ ﯾُﻘِﯿۡﻤَﺎ ﺣُﺪُوۡدَ ﱣِ ဃ ؕ ◌ ﻓَﺎِنۡ ﺧِﻔۡﺘُﻢۡ اَﻻﱠ ﯾُﻘِﯿۡﻤَﺎ ﺣُﺪُوۡدَ ﱣِ ဃ ۙ ◌ ﻓَﻼَ ﺟُﻨَﺎحَ ﻋَﻠَﯿۡﮩِﻤَﺎ ﻓِﯿۡﻤَﺎ اﻓۡﺘَﺪَتۡ ﺑِہٖ ؕ ◌ ﺗِﻠۡﮏَ ﺣُﺪُوۡدُ ﱣِ ဃ ﻓَ ﻻَ ﺗَﻌۡﺘَﺪُوۡﮨَﺎ ۚ ◌ وَﻣَﻦۡ ﯾﱠﺘَﻌَﺪﱠ ﺣُﺪُوۡدَ ﱣِ ဃ ﻓَﺎُوﻟٰٓﺌِﮏَ ﮨُﻢُ اﻟﻈﱣﻠِﻤُﻮۡنَ Such divorce may be pronounced twice; then, either retain them in a becoming manner or send them away with kindnes s.

[18] And it is not lawful for you that you take anything of what you have given them (your wives) unless both fear that they cannot observe the limits prescribed by Allah. But, if you fear that they cannot observe the limits prescribed by Allah, then it shall be no sin for either of them in what she gives to get her freedom.

[19] These are the limits prescribed by Allah, so transgress them not; and whoso transgresses the limits prescribed by Allah, it is they that are the wrongdoers. طﻼق دو ﻣﺮﺗﺒہ ﮨﮯ۔ ﭘﺲ )اس ﮐﮯ ﺑﻌﺪ( ﯾﺎ ﺗﻮ ﻣﻌﺮوف طﺮﯾﻖ ﭘﺮ روک رﮐﮭﻨﺎ ﮨﮯ ﯾﺎ اﺣﺴﺎن ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﺗﮭ رﺧﺼﺖ ﮐﺮﻧﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ اور ﺗﻤﮩﺎرے ﻟﺌﮯ ﺟﺎﺋﺰ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﮐہ ﺗﻢ اُس ﻣﯿﮟ ﺳﮯ ﮐﭽﮭ ﺑﮭﯽ واﭘﺲ ﻟﻮ ﺟﻮ ﺗﻢ اﻧﮩﯿﮟ دے ﭼﮑﮯ ﮨﻮ۔ ﺳﻮاﺋﮯ اس ﮐﮯ ﮐہ وه دوﻧﻮں ﺧﺎﺋﻒ ﮨﻮں ﮐہ وه ﷲ ﮐﯽ ﺣﺪود ﮐﻮ ﻗﺎﺋﻢ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ رﮐﮭ ﺳﮑﯿﮟ ﮔﮯ۔ اور اﮔﺮ ﺗﻢ ﺧﻮف ﻣﺤﺴﻮس ﮐﺮو ﮐہ وه دوﻧﻮں ﷲ ﮐﯽ ﻣﻘﺮره ﺣﺪود ﮐﻮ ﻗﺎﺋﻢ ﻧہ رﮐﮭ ﺳﮑﯿﮟ ﮔﮯ ﺗﻮ ان دوﻧﻮں ﭘﺮ ﮐﻮﺋﯽ ﮔﻨﺎه C.P.L.A.181 of 2023 5 ﻧﮩﯿﮟ اس )ﻣﺎل ﮐﮯ( ﺑﺎره ﻣﯿﮟ ﺟﻮ وه ﻋﻮرت )ﻗﻀﯿہ ﻧﭙﭩﺎﻧﮯ ﮐﯽ ﺧﺎطﺮ ﻣﺮد ﮐﮯ ﺣﻖ ﻣﯿﮟ( ﭼﮭﻮڑ دے۔ ﯾہ ﷲ ﮐﯽ ﻗﺎﺋﻢ ﮐﺮده ﺣﺪود ﮨﯿﮟ ﭘﺲ ان ﺳﮯ ﺗﺠﺎوز ﻧہ ﮐﺮو۔ اور ﺟﻮ ﮐﻮﺋﯽ ﷲ ﮐﯽ ﺣﺪو د ﺳﮯ ﺗﺠﺎوز ﮐﺮے ﭘﺲ ﯾﮩﯽ ﻟﻮگ ﮨﯿﮟ ﺟﻮ ظﺎﻟﻢ ﮨﯿﮟ۔ (2:230) ﻓَﺎِنْ طَﻠﱠﻘَﮭَﺎ ﻓَﻼَ ﺗَﺤِﻞﱡ ﻟَﮫٗ ﻣِﻦْۢ ﺑَﻌْﺪُ ﺣَﺘﱣﯽ ﺗَﻨْﻜِﺢَ زَوْﺟًﺎ ﻏَﯿْﺮَهٗ ؕ ﻓَﺎِنْ طَﻠﱠﻘَﮭَﺎ ﻓَﻼَ ﱣِ ဃ ﱣِ ؕ وَ ﺗِﻠْﻚَ ﺣُﺪُوْدُ ဃ ﺟُﻨَﺎحَ ﻋَﻠَﯿْﮭِﻤَﺎۤ اَنْ ﯾﱠﺘَﺮَاﺟَﻌَﺎۤ اِنْ ظَﻨﱠﺎۤ اَنْ ﯾﱡﻘِﯿْﻤَﺎ ﺣُﺪُوْدَ ﯾُﺒَﯿِّﻨُﮭَﺎ ﻟِﻘَﻮْمٍ ﯾﱠﻌْﻠَﻤُﻮْنَ ۝ Then if he divorces (for the third time), she will not be lawful for him until she marries some husband other than him.

[20] But if he (the latter) also divorces her, in such a case there shall be no sin on both of them (the former husband and the wife) if they return (once more to the wedlock), provided both of them (now) think that they would be able to observe the limits set by Allah. And these are the limits (prescribed) by Allah which He explains to those who have knowledge. ﭘﮭﺮ اﮔﺮ اس ﻧﮯ )ﺗﯿﺴﺮی ﻣﺮﺗﺒہ( طﻼق دے دی ﺗﻮ اس ﮐﮯ ﺑﻌﺪ وه اس ﮐﮯ ﻟﺌﮯ ﺣﻼل ﻧہ ﮨﻮﮔﯽ ﯾﮩﺎں ﺗﮏ ﮐہ وه ﮐﺴﯽ اور ﺷﻮﮨﺮ ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﺗﮭ ﻧﮑﺎح ﮐﺮ ﻟﮯ، ﭘﮭﺮ اﮔﺮ وه )دوﺳﺮا ﺷﻮﮨﺮ( ﺑﮭﯽ طﻼق دے دے ﺗﻮ اب ان دوﻧﻮں )ﯾﻌﻨﯽ ﭘﮩﻠﮯ ﺷﻮﮨﺮ اور اس ﻋﻮرت( ﭘﺮ ﮐﻮﺋﯽ ﮔﻨﺎه ﻧہ ﮨﻮﮔﺎ اﮔﺮ وه )دوﺑﺎره رﺷﺘۂ زوﺟﯿﺖ ﻣﯿﮟ( ﭘﻠﭧ ﺟﺎﺋﯿﮟ ﺑﺸﺮطﯿﮑہ دوﻧﻮں ﯾہ ﺧﯿﺎل ﮐﺮﯾﮟ ﮐہ )اب( وه ﺣﺪودِ اﻟٰﮩﯽ ﻗﺎﺋﻢ رﮐﮭ ﺳﮑﯿﮟ ﮔﮯ، ﯾہ ﷲ ﮐﯽ )ﻣﻘﺮر ﮐﺮده( ﺣﺪود ﮨﯿﮟ ﺟﻨﮩﯿﮟ وه ﻋﻠﻢ واﻟﻮں ﮐﮯ ﻟﺌﮯ ﺑﯿﺎن ﻓﺮﻣﺎﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ (2:231) وَاِذَا طَﻠﱠﻘۡﺘُﻢُ اﻟﻨِّﺴَﺎٓءَ ﻓَﺒَﻠَﻐۡﻦَ اَﺟَﻠَﮩُﻦﱠ ﻓَﺎَﻣۡﺴِﮑُﻮۡﮨُﻦﱠ ﺑِﻤَﻌۡﺮُوۡفٍ اَوۡ ﺳَﺮِّﺣُﻮۡﮨُﻦﱠ ﺑِﻤَﻌۡﺮُوۡ فٍ ۪ ◌ وَﻻَ ﺗُﻤۡﺴِﮑُﻮۡﮨُﻦﱠ ﺿِﺮَارًا ﻟِّﺘَﻌۡﺘَﺪُوۡا ۚ ◌ وَﻣَﻦۡ ﯾﱠﻔۡﻌَﻞۡ ذٰﻟِﮏَ ﻓَﻘَﺪۡ ظَﻠَﻢَ ﻧَﻔۡﺴَہٗ ؕ ◌ وَﻻَ ﺗَﺘﱠﺨِﺬُوۡۤا اٰﯾٰﺖِ ﱣِ ဃ ﮨُﺰُوًا ۫ ◌ وﱠاذۡﮐُﺮُوۡا ﻧِﻌۡﻤَﺖَ ﱣِ ဃ ﻋَﻠَﯿۡﮑُﻢۡ وَﻣَﺎۤ اَﻧۡﺰَلَ ﻋَﻠَﯿۡﮑُﻢۡ ﻣِّ نَ اﻟۡﮑِﺘٰﺐِ وَاﻟۡﺤِﮑۡﻤَۃِ ﯾَﻌِﻈُﮑُﻢۡ ﺑِہٖ ؕ ◌ وَاﺗﱠﻘُﻮا ﱣَ ဃ وَاﻋۡﻠَﻤُﻮۡۤا اَنﱠ ﱣَ ဃ ﺑِﮑُﻞِّ ﺷَﯽۡءٍ ﻋَﻠِ ﯾۡﻢٌ And when you divorce your wives and they approach the end of their appointed period, then either retain them in a becoming manner; or send them away in a becoming manner; but retain them not wrongfully so that you may transgress.

[21] And whoso does that, surely wrongs his own soul. And do not make a jest of the commandments of Allah, and remember the favour of Allah upon you and the Book and the Wisdom which He has sent down to you, whereby He exhorts you. And fear Allah and know that Allah knows all things well. اور ﺟﺐ ﺗﻢ ﻋﻮرﺗﻮں ﮐﻮ طﻼق دو اور وه اﭘﻨﯽ ﻣﻘﺮره ﻣﯿﻌﺎد ﭘﻮری ﮐﺮ ﻟﯿﮟ )ﺗﻮ ﭼﺎﮨﻮ( ﺗﻮ ﺗﻢ اﻧﮩﯿﮟ دﺳﺘﻮر ﮐﮯ ﻣﻄﺎﺑﻖ روک ﻟﻮ ﯾﺎ )ﭼﺎﮨﻮ ﺗﻮ( ﻣﻌﺮوف طﺮﯾﻖ ﭘﺮ رﺧﺼﺖ ﮐﺮو۔ اور ﺗﻢ اﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﺗﮑﻠﯿﻒ ﭘﮩﻨﭽﺎﻧﮯ ﮐﯽ ﺧﺎطﺮ ﻧہ روﮐﻮ ﺗﺎﮐہ ان ﭘﺮ زﯾﺎدﺗﯽ ﮐﺮﺳﮑﻮ۔ اور ﺟﻮ ﺑﮭﯽ اﯾﺴﺎ ﮐﺮے ﺗﻮ ﯾﻘﯿﻨﺎً اس ﻧﮯ اﭘﻨﯽ ﮨﯽ ﺟﺎن ﭘﺮ ظﻠﻢ ﮐﯿﺎ۔ اور ﷲ ﮐﯽ آﯾﺎت ﮐﻮ ﻣﺬاق ﮐﺎ ﻧﺸﺎﻧہ ﻧہ ﺑﻨﺎؤ۔ اور ﷲ ﮐﯽ اس ﻧﻌﻤﺖ ﮐﻮ ﯾﺎد ﮐﺮو ﺟﻮ ﺗﻢ ﭘﺮ ﮨﮯ۔ اور ﺟﻮ اس ﻧﮯ ﺗﻢ ﭘﺮ ﮐﺘﺎب اور ﺣﮑﻤﺖ ﻣﯿﮟ ﺳﮯ اﺗﺎرا وه اس ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﺗﮭ ﺗﻤﮩﯿﮟ ﻧﺼﯿﺤﺖ ﮐﺮﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ اور ﷲ ﮐﺎ ﺗﻘﻮیٰ اﺧﺘﯿﺎر ﮐﺮو اور ﺟﺎن ﻟﻮ ﮐہ ﷲ ﮨﺮ ﭼﯿﺰ ﮐﺎ ﺧﻮب ﻋﻠﻢ رﮐﮭﺘﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ (2:232) وَاِذَا طَﻠﱠﻘۡﺘُﻢُ اﻟﻨِّﺴَﺎٓءَ ﻓَﺒَﻠَﻐۡﻦَ اَﺟَﻠَﮩُﻦﱠ ﻓَﻼَ ﺗَﻌۡﻀُﻠُﻮۡﮨُﻦﱠ اَنۡ ﯾﱠﻨۡﮑِﺤۡﻦَ اَزۡوَاﺟَﮩُﻦﱠ اِذَا ﺗَﺮَا ﺿَﻮۡا ﺑَﯿۡﻨَﮩُﻢۡ ﺑِﺎﻟۡﻤَﻌۡﺮُوۡفِ ؕ ◌ ذٰﻟِﮏَ ﯾُﻮۡﻋَﻆُ ﺑِہٖ ﻣَﻦۡ ﮐَﺎنَ ﻣِﻨۡﮑُﻢۡ ﯾُﺆۡﻣِﻦُ ﱣِ ๡ﺑِﺎ وَاﻟۡﯿَﻮۡمِ اﻻٰۡﺧِﺮِ ؕ ◌ ذٰﻟِﮑُﻢۡ اَزۡﮐٰﯽ ﻟَﮑُﻢۡ وَاَطۡﮩَﺮُ ؕ ◌ ﱣُ ဃ وَ ﯾَﻌۡﻠَﻢُ وَاَﻧۡﺘُﻢۡ ﻻَ ﺗَﻌۡﻠَﻤُﻮۡنَ And when you divorce women and they reach the end of their period, prevent them not from marrying their husbands, if they agree between themselves in a decent manner.

[22] This is a n admonition for him among you who believes in Allah and the Last Day. It is more blessed for you and purer; and Allah knows but you do not know. اور ﺟﺐ ﺗﻢ ﻋﻮرﺗﻮں ﮐﻮ طﻼق دو اور وه اﭘﻨﯽ ﻣﯿﻌﺎد ﭘﻮری ﮐﺮ ﻟﯿﮟ، ﺗﻮ اﻧﮩﯿﮟ اس ﺑﺎت ﺳﮯ ﻧہ روﮐﻮ ﮐہ وه اﭘﻨﮯ )ﮨﻮﻧﮯ واﻟﮯ( ﺧﺎوﻧﺪوں ﺳﮯ ﺷﺎدی ﮐﺮ ﻟﯿﮟ، ﺟﺐ وه ﻣﻌﺮوف طﺮﯾﻖ ﭘﺮ آﭘﺲ ﻣﯿﮟ اس ﺑﺎت ﭘﺮ رﺿﺎﻣﻨﺪ ﮨﻮﺟﺎﺋﯿﮟ۔ ﯾہ ﻧﺼﯿﺤﺖ اُﺳﮯ ﮐﯽ ﺟﺎرﮨﯽ ﮨﮯ ﺟﻮ ﺗﻢ ﻣﯿﮟ ﺳﮯ ﷲ ﭘﺮ اور ﯾﻮم آﺧﺮت ﭘﺮ اﯾﻤﺎن ﻻﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ ﯾہ ﺗﻤﮩﯿﮟ زﯾﺎده ﻧﯿﮏ اور زﯾﺎده ﭘﺎک ﺑﻨﺎﻧﮯ واﻻ طﺮﯾﻖ ﮨﮯ۔ اور ﷲ ﺟﺎﻧﺘﺎ ﮨﮯ ﺟﺒﮑہ ﺗﻢ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﺟﺎﻧﺘﮯ۔ (65:1) ﱣَ ဃ ﯾٰۤﺎَﯾﱡﮩَﺎ اﻟﻨﱠﺒِﯽﱡ اِذَا طَﻠﱠﻘۡﺘُﻢُ اﻟﻨِّﺴَﺎٓءَ ﻓَﻄَﻠِّﻘُﻮۡﮨُﻦﱠ ﻟِﻌِﺪﱠﺗِﮩِﻦﱠ وَ اَﺣۡﺼُﻮا اﻟۡﻌِﺪﱠةَ ۚ وَ اﺗﱠﻘُﻮا رَﺑﱠﮑُﻢۡ ۚ ﻻَ ﺗُﺨۡﺮِﺟُﻮۡﮨُﻦﱠ ﻣِﻦۡۢ ﺑُﯿُﻮۡﺗِﮩِﻦﱠ وَ ﻻَ ﯾَﺨۡﺮُﺟۡﻦَ اِﻻﱠۤ اَنۡ ﯾﱠﺎۡﺗِﯿۡﻦَ ﺑِﻔَﺎﺣِﺸَۃٍ ﻣﱡﺒَﯿِّﻨَۃٍ ؕ ﱣَ ဃ ﱣِ ﻓَﻘَﺪۡ ظَﻠَﻢَ ﻧَﻔۡﺴَہٗ ؕ ﻻَ ﺗَﺪۡرِیۡ ﻟَﻌَﻞﱠ ဃ ﱣِ ؕ وَ ﻣَﻦۡ ﯾﱠﺘَﻌَﺪﱠ ﺣُﺪُوۡدَ ဃ وَ ﺗِﻠۡﮏَ ﺣُﺪُوۡدُ ﯾُﺤۡﺪِثُ ﺑَﻌۡﺪَ ذٰﻟِﮏَ اَﻣۡﺮًا C.P.L.A.181 of 2023 6 O Prophet! (Say to the Muslims:) ‘When you seek to divorce your women, divorce them during their period of purit y and count their prescribed period.

[23] And keep fearing Allah, who is your Lord. And do not drive them out of their homes, nor should they leave unless they commit open indecency. And these are Allah’s (fixed) limits. And whoever transgresses Allah’s limits has surely wronged his own soul. (O man,) you do not know that Allah may perhaps develop a new situation (to turn you back to her after divorce). 1 . اے ﻧﺒﯽ! )ﻣﺴﻠﻤﺎﻧﻮں ﺳﮯ ﻓﺮﻣﺎ دﯾﮟ:( ﺟﺐ ﺗﻢ ﻋﻮرﺗﻮں ﮐﻮ طﻼق دﯾﻨﺎ ﭼﺎﮨﻮ ﺗﻮ اُن ﮐﮯ طُﮩﺮ ﮐﮯ زﻣﺎﻧہ ﻣﯿﮟ اﻧﮩﯿﮟ طﻼق دو اور ﻋِﺪّت ﮐﻮ ﺷﻤﺎر ﮐﺮو، اور ﷲ ﺳﮯ ڈرﺗﮯ رﮨﻮ ﺟﻮ ﺗﻤﮩﺎرا رب ﮨﮯ، اور اﻧﮩﯿﮟ اُن ﮐﮯ ﮔﮭﺮوں ﺳﮯ ﺑﺎﮨﺮ ﻣﺖ ﻧﮑﺎﻟﻮ اور ﻧہ وه ﺧﻮد ﺑﺎﮨﺮ ﻧﮑﻠﯿﮟ ﺳﻮاﺋﮯ اس ﮐﮯ ﮐہ وه ﮐﮭﻠﯽ ﺑﮯ ﺣﯿﺎﺋﯽ ﮐﺮ ﺑﯿﭩﮭﯿﮟ، اور ﯾہ ﷲ ﮐﯽ )ﻣﻘﺮرّه( ﺣﺪﯾﮟ ﮨﯿﮟ، اور ﺟﻮ ﺷﺨﺺ ﷲ ﮐﯽ ﺣﺪود ﺳﮯ ﺗﺠﺎوز ﮐﺮے ﺗﻮ ﺑﯿﺸﮏ اُس ﻧﮯ اﭘﻨﯽ ﺟﺎن ﭘﺮ ظﻠﻢ ﮐﯿﺎ ﮨﮯ، )اے ﺷﺨﺺ!( ﺗﻮ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﺟﺎﻧﺘﺎ ﺷﺎﯾﺪ ﷲ اِس ﮐﮯ )طﻼق دﯾﻨﮯ ﮐﮯ( ﺑﻌﺪ )رﺟﻮع ﮐﯽ( ﮐﻮﺋﯽ ﻧﺌﯽ ﺻﻮرت ﭘﯿﺪا ﻓﺮﻣﺎ دے (33:49) ﯾٰۤﺎَﯾﱡﮩَﺎ اﻟﱠﺬِﯾۡﻦَ اٰﻣَﻨُﻮۡۤا اِذَا ﻧَﮑَﺤۡﺘُﻢُ اﻟۡﻤُﺆۡﻣِﻨٰﺖِ ﺛُﻢﱠ طَﻠﱠﻘۡﺘُﻤُﻮۡﮨُﻦﱠ ﻣِﻦۡ ﻗَﺒۡﻞِ اَنۡ ﺗَﻤَﺴﱡﻮۡﮨُﻦﱠ ﻓَﻤَ ﺎ ﻟَﮑُﻢۡ ﻋَﻠَﯿۡﮩِﻦﱠ ﻣِﻦۡ ﻋِﺪﱠةٍ ﺗَﻌۡﺘَﺪﱡوۡﻧَﮩَﺎ ۚ ﻓَﻤَﺘِّﻌُﻮۡﮨُﻦﱠ وَ ﺳَﺮِّﺣُﻮۡﮨُﻦﱠ ﺳَﺮَاﺣًﺎ ﺟَﻤِﯿۡﻼً O believers!

[24] When you marry the bel ieving women and then divorce them before you have touched them (i.e., had sexual intercourse with them), then no waiting period is (obligatory) on them for you which you may start counting. So, give them some provision, and send them off nicely extending to them kindness. اے اﯾﻤﺎن واﻟﻮ! ﺟﺐ ﺗﻢ ﻣﻮﻣﻦ ﻋﻮرﺗﻮں ﺳﮯ ﻧﮑﺎح ﮐﺮو ﭘﮭﺮ ﺗﻢ اﻧﮩﯿﮟ طﻼق دے دو ﻗﺒﻞ اس ﮐﮯ ﮐہ ﺗﻢ اﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﻣَﺲ ﮐﺮو )ﯾﻌﻨﯽ ﺧﻠﻮتِ ﺻﺤﯿﺤہ ﮐﺮو( ﺗﻮ ﺗﻤﮩﺎرے ﻟﺌﮯ ان ﭘﺮ ﮐﻮﺋﯽ ﻋﺪّت )واﺟﺐ( ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﺗﻢ اﺳﮯ ﺷﻤﺎر ﮐﺮﻧﮯ ﻟﮕﻮ، ﭘﺲ اﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﮐﭽﮭ ﻣﺎل و ﻣﺘﺎع دو اور اﻧﮩﯿﮟ اﭼﮭﯽ طﺮح ﺣُﺴﻦِ ﺳﻠﻮک ﮐﮯ ﺳﺎﺗﮭ رﺧﺼﺖ ﮐﺮو o (4:35) وَ اِنۡ ﺧِﻔۡﺘُﻢۡ ﺷِﻘَﺎقَ ﺑَﯿۡﻨِﮩِﻤَﺎ ﻓَﺎﺑۡﻌَﺜُﻮۡا ﺣَﮑَﻤًﺎ ﻣِّﻦۡ اَﮨۡﻠِہٖ وَ ﺣَﮑَﻤًﺎ ﻣِّﻦۡ اَﮨۡﻠِﮩَﺎ ۚ اِنۡ ﯾﱡﺮِﯾۡﺪَاۤ ﱣَ ﮐَﺎنَ ﻋَﻠِﯿۡﻤًﺎ ﺧَﺒِﯿۡﺮًا ဃ ﱣُ ﺑَﯿۡﻨَﮩُﻤَﺎ ؕ اِنﱠ ဃ اِﺻۡﻼَﺣًﺎ ﯾﱡﻮَﻓِّﻖِ And if you fear a breach between the two, then appoint one arbitrator from the husband’s family and the other from the wife’s family.

[25] If both (the arbitrators) resolve to bring about settlement, Allah will create harmony between them. Indeed, Allah is All -Knowing, All -Aware. . اور اﮔﺮ ﺗﻤﮩﯿﮟ ان دوﻧﻮں ﮐﮯ درﻣﯿﺎن ﻣﺨﺎﻟﻔﺖ ﮐﺎ اﻧﺪﯾﺸہ ﮨﻮ ﺗﻮ ﺗﻢ اﯾﮏ ﻣُﻨﺼِﻒ ﻣﺮد ﮐﮯ ﺧﺎﻧﺪان ﺳﮯ اور اﯾﮏ ﻣُﻨﺼِﻒ ﻋﻮرت ﮐﮯ ﺧﺎﻧﺪان ﺳﮯ ﻣﻘﺮر ﮐﺮ ﻟﻮ، اﮔﺮ وه دوﻧﻮں )ﻣُﻨﺼِﻒ( ﺻﻠﺢ ﮐﺮاﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ اِراده رﮐﮭﯿﮟ ﺗﻮ ﷲ ان دوﻧﻮں ﮐﮯ درﻣﯿﺎن ﻣﻮاﻓﻘﺖ ﭘﯿﺪا ﻓﺮﻣﺎ دے ﮔﺎ، ﺑﯿﺸﮏ ﷲ ﺧﻮب ﺟﺎﻧﻨﮯ واﻻ ﺧﺒﺮدار ﮨﮯ o 7.

[26] The concept of triple talaq, not finding its roots in the Holy Quran or the authentic Hadith, has been a subject of considerable controversy among various schools of Islamic thought. Notably Fiqah Jaffaria and the Maliki School do not recognize its validity, a view also shared by the Shafi School. The Hanbali School of thought, however, treats triple talaq as a single divorce if the marriage was consummated and the pronouncement made in a specific form.2 This divergence of interpretation and the social consequences of a unilateral and instant divorce have given rise to legislative intervention and compassion in the form of Sub -section 3 of Section 7 of the Muslim Family Law Ordinance, 1961 (the “Ordinance” ).

[27] This provision mandates that a talaq shall not take effect unless a period of ninety - days has elapsed from the date on 2 Pg.91, Muslim Law of Divorce by K.N Ahmed (1984) C.P.L.A.181 of 2023 7 which notice is given to the Chairman of the Union Council. During this statutory period, the marital status of the spouses remains unaffected, thereby affording an opportunity for reconciliation.

[28] The legislative intent is to discourage hasty divorces requiring a cooling -off period consistent with Islamic principles. Far from being repugnant to the Islamic Injunctions, this provision is in harmony with the Quranic commandment found in Surah Al Baqrah , which enjoins a period of waiting and reflection before the finality of divorce. 8.

[29] Furthermore, whilst Islam has permitted the dissolution of marriage in cases of necessity, it is a course strongly discouraged and disapproved in principle. The Quran prescribes a structured procedure for when divorce becomes final and absolute, which necessarily includes the observance of Iddah, that is, a waiting period a woman must observe following the death of her spouse or a divorce.

[30] Iddah is not merely symbolic but serves a substantive purpose, for it allows for reflection, potential reconciliation, and the possible retraction of the pronouncement of divorce. However, recognising Talaq -e-Biddat as immediately effective undermines this essential safeguard, depriving the husband of the opportunity to revisit a hasty decision and standing in clear conflict with the Quranic injunctions governing the sanctity and dissolution of marriage. 9.

[31] This Court, in Mst.Rehmat Bibi case3, upheld the High Court’s decision, where the husband had pronounced talaq three days before his death. It was held that succession opens at the time of death, and since the ninety -day period under the Ordinance had not passed, the divorce was not effective. Consequently, the wife was deemed a legal heir. 10.

[32] Before parting our ways with this judgment, it is imperative to note that divorce, although permissible, has been disdained by the Holy Quran to a very high degree, particularly for its grave consequences, especially for women. A divorced woman is frequently subjected to significant economic, social and psychological hardships upon leaving her matrimonial home, along with a stigma that may continue to haunt her for the rest of her life.

[33] It is precisely for these reasons that Islam prescribes a deliberate and 3 1988 SCMR 1812, Mst.Rehmat Bibi v. Mst.Sharifan Bibi & Others C.P.L.A.181 of 2023 8 reconciliatory process for the dissolution of marriage, emphasising restraint and fairness to all parties involved. 11. For all the aforesaid reasons, we are of the considered view that written talaq pronounced by the deceased, Shah Bakht Rawan, had not become final in accordance with the injunctions of the Holy Quran nor did it fully comply with the mandatory statutory period under Sub -section (3) of Section 7 of the Ordinance.

[34] Consequently, Mst. Mussarat, the respondent, continue s to remain the lawful widow of Shah Bakht Rawan, entitled to inherit his estate. 12. We find no legal flaw in the impugned judgment of the High Court calling for interference. Therefore, in the light of the foregoing discussion, we are of the view that the petition has no force and is hereby dismissed and leave declined.

[35] No order as to costs. Chief Justice Judge Judge Islamabad 09.04.2025 APPROVED FOR REPORTING M.Rizwan/Rameen Shahram, L.C.