Case No: C.P.19/2022
Case Title: Islamabad High Court Bar Association through its President Muhammad Shoaib Shaheen, Islamabad v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary Ministry of Interior Islamabad and others
Subject: U/A 184(3)
Judge: Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial
Judgment Date: 26-05-2022
Upload Date: 01-06-2022
Citations: PLD 2022 SC 511
SC Citations: 2022 SCP 182
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/const.p._19_2022_01062022.pdf

[1] order of the lea rned Bench passed at about 6:00 pm on 25.05.2022. 2. Later, a n applicati on being CMA No. 3447 of 2022 was filed at about 10:30 pm on 25.05.202 2 by the learned Attorney General for P akistan (“AGP”). It alleged t hat the Pakistan Tehreek -e-Insaf ( “PTI”) leadership , in particular its Chairma n Mr.

[2] Imran Khan , had contrary to his assurances given to the Court directed his party me mbers and supp orters to march in to Islamabad and reach D -Chowk located in the sensitive R ed Zone are a of the Capital. He has read fro m the order of this Court passed on 25.05.2022. The Court had directed Dr.Babar Awan, Sr.

[3] ASC and Mr. Faisal Fareed, ASC appearing fo r the PTI leadership to seek assurance from their client that PTI workers/suppor ters would remain peacefu l and follow the guidelines issued by the Court from time to time. That they will neither obstruct road traffic or caus e damage to private/publi c property nor tak e the law into their own hands .

[4] In this respect the two learned counse l on instructions from the top leadership of PTI gave a categorical Const. P. -:4:- assurance that the party rally would neither block the Sirinagar Highway nor otherwise cause inconvenience to the public and citizen s at large and t hat t heir rallies shall be conducted in a peaceful and lawful manner without causing any damage to public or private property. 3.

[5] In view o f these commitments , the Court by its aforesaid order passed on 25.05 .2022 directed the Chief Commissioner, I slamabad Capital Territory ( “ICT”) to provide the ground located in the area between Sectors H -9/G-9 of Islamabad for the political rally; and also directed the Inspect or General of Police (“IGP”), ICT to forthwith take measures including making security arrangements to prepar e the venue for holding the PTI rally.

[6] Furthermore, the Court directed that the lawyers and other persons reportedly placed under arrest in raids conducted without any comp laint or FIR being recorded against them shall be rel eased from custody forthw ith. The AGP undertook that houses, of fices and private premises shall n either be raided i n an attempt to arrest nor shall political workers or supporters of PTI or any other political party be arrested unless an FIR was lodge d against them or the commissi on of any heinous or cognizable offe nce by them was suspected .

[7] Accordingly, a direction in the said terms was issued by the Court. Finally, the Court recorded its expectation that the top leadership of all concern ed political Const. P. -:5:- parties shall d irect their wor kers and supporters to remain calm, d isengage and not to create law and order situation under any circumstances.

[8] Equally, it was noted that the top functionaries of the Government including the Interio r Ministry s hall ensure that excessive or disprop ortion ate use of force against the politica l work ers is disco ntinue d immediately. 4. In the foregoing background the AGP argued that having agreed to hold the PTI rally at the ground in the H-9/ G-9 area of Islamabad as reco rded by the order of the Court , Mr.

[9] Imran Khan shortly thereafter instruc ted PTI supporters to reach D-Chowk in the Red Zone of Islamaba d. To establish this retractio n a video record ing of Mr. Imran Khan ’s statement made af ter the passing of the above said order was played on the multimedia screen before the Court. He contended that i n the above circumstances, Mr.

[10] Imran K han appears to have invited his supporters to dishonor the assurance given on his behalf to the Court. As a result , private and public propert ies were damage d and destroyed. Some trees in the greenbelt of Blue A rea of Islamabad w ere put o n fire. 31 Police Officers were injured by the stones pelted by the crow d and Article 245 of the Constitution had to be invoked in the middle of the night by calling the armed forces in aid of civil power.

[11] The learned AGP accordi ngly Const. P. -:6:- requested the Court to take action against Mr. Imran Khan for breach of his ass urances given to the Court. 5. Finall y, the AGP informed that Mr . Imran Khan had issued a statement this morning at a location on Jin nah Avenue (leading to D -Chowk) that after witne ssing the teargas shelling by the law enforcement agencies he will not proceed with the sit-in at D -Chowk.

[12] He gave six days’ time to the Government to dissolve the assemblies and announce a date for elections . 6. The Court views the foregoing events with con cern. It is apparent that the assuranc es conveyed to the Court by the learned counsel for the top leadership of the PTI may have been dishonored by the workers/supporters/sympathizers of the party by proceeding to the D-Chowk i n the Red Zone area and by allegedly committing acts of arson and d estruction of public and private properties on the way.

[13] However, we note that in the early mor ning today Mr. Imran Khan reached Jinnah Aven ue leading to D -Chow k and announ ced the postp onement of his sit -in at Islama bad for six days. As a result , further damage to property or injury to human life has been averted . 7. Nevertheless, t here remains the lurking question whether the responsibility for the events of yesterda y evening comprising rec kless acts of mob anger can be blamed upon Const.

[14] P. -:7:- the senior leadership of the PTI . So far there is no evidence or allegation that such acts were committed on the instigation of any party or happen ed randomly. At its most elementary level the PTI leader appears to have assured the h olding of a political rally at the G -9/H-9 ground and therefore not to assemble and sit in another venue including at D-Chowk in G-5 Islamabad.

[15] However, t he AGP claims that the PTI workers and supporters moved fo rward to the D -Chowk area in response to the call made by their leader. Notwithstanding the said request by th e AGP, we exercise restraint for the time being for a number of reasons. Firstly, Mr. Imran Khan has called off the r ally/public meeting .

[16] That gives a recess to the charged mob witnessed last night. Secondly, p rudence advises that time be given for san ity to prevail among the stakeholders . In any event, facts and mate rials need to be collected to establish the sequence of events , the ident ity of the perpetrators and of the instigators , if any .

[17] At this stage therefore it is directed th at the IG P ICT , the Chief Comm issioner ICT, the Secretary Ministry of Interior, the Director G eneral Intell igence Bu reau, the Director General ISI shall file reports answering , inter alia, the following questions : a) At what time did Mr. Imran Khan make the announcem ent for par ty worke rs to reach D - Chowk? b) When , where and how did the crowd cross the barricade to enter a hitherto closed area ? Const.

[18] P. -:8:- c) Was the crow d enteri ng the Red Zone organized or supervis ed or did it move randomly? d) Were there any acts of provocation or breach of assurance by the Government ? e) Was any action or treatment meted out by the ICT police against the protesters disp roportionate to the a ctual or perc eived wrong committed by the protesters ? f) How many protesters manage d to en ter the Red Zone? Which security arrang ements , if any, were relaxed by the Executive authorit ies? Whet her any securi ty barrier cordon s were broken or breached by p rotestors? Did any protestor/ party worker reach the G-9/ H-9 ground ? g) How many civilian s were injured/ killed/ hospitalized/ arrested ?

[19] The said reports shall be filed within one week for per usal in chambers by t he learned me mbers of this larger Benc h. 8. There is need for verification of , inter alia, factual aspects of the events that occurred in order for the C ourt to evaluate and decide whether action for violation of assurances /undertaking given to the Court a nd recorded in our order dated 25.0 5.2022 ought to be initiated and agai nst whom.

[20] I t may be observed that the disregard of assur ances/ undertakings given to the Court involves separate proceedings from the present one. Therefore, the prayer made by the lea rned AGP in these p roceeding s is misconceived . Accordingly, CMA No. 3447 of 2022 is dismissed. For independent proceedings to be maintain ed, relevant and credi ble material m ust be presented to the Cou rt for it to Const.

[21] P. -:9:- assess whether there are valid g rounds to justify appropriate action against th e offending persons, if any. 9. Be that as it may, our order dated 25.05.2022 issue s direction s to the Government authorities to protect the constitutional rights of the people of Pakistan as guaranteed in Arti cle 15 , which secures the right of free mov ement , and Article 16 , which protects the ir right of freedom of assembly .

[22] These constitutional provisions are to be read in co njunction with the most cr ucial right guaranteed by the Constitutio n, namely, the right to life. The violation of the right to lif e of citizens unde r Article 9 of the Constitution caused by the arrest of hund reds of political workers across the country without recording FIRs or ser ving detention orders were accordingly quashed by our aforesaid order as a protectiv e measure under the Constitution .

[23] However, it must be under stood that each of the foregoing fundamental right is subject to correspondi ng qualification s. The provi sions o f Articles 9, 15 and 16 of the Constitution may be read to appre ciate the point. The right to life and lib erty is interpreted widely an d the same cannot be interfered except as author ized by law.

[24] Likewise , the freedom of mo vement can be subjected to reasona ble restriction s imposed by law in the public int erest. The free dom of assembly may be reg ulated by similar restrictions applied in the interest of public order. The Const. P. -:10:- foregoing limitation s on the rights granted by the Constitution empower the State to take only s uch reasonable, proportionate and lawful action that is necessary in aid of public interest and pub lic order so that public place, public life and property are not disturbed , disrupted or destroyed . 10.

[25] By acting upon assurances given on behalf of the top leadership of PTI and issuing directions to the Government , our order dated 25.05.2022 created a balance between the mutual rights a nd obligations of the protesting people , the ordinary public and the duties of the State . This balance was recorded in good faith by the Court whilst trust ing the representation s made on behalf of the two opposing parties before it.

[26] We ar e disappointed to note that the bona fide effort made by the Court was disrespe cted. Although it w as meant to create harmon y between the two opposin g sides for the sake of protect ing public interest and the constitutional rights of the peo ple, such order was passed by trusting the representation s made and assurances given to the Court.

[27] The judicia l trust r eposed by the Court on the parties before it conf ers mora l legitimacy and authority upon their actions . The resulting high moral ground lends credibilit y to the entit lement and to the propriety of actions taken by such parties . In the present case, to say the least, the m oral high ground held by the parties has diminished Const.

[28] P. -:11:- because public rights , interests, and pro perty of the disinterested p ublic have been breached and damag ed badly . We expect that the high functionaries of the Executive throug hout the country and the top leadership o f the PTI and other political parties shal l abide and settle a fair code of securing free, fair, and peaceful political activity in the country leading to the holding of the national election .

[29] It may be reiterated th at wh ilst right of pe aceful protest is a constitutional right it must be exercised subject to permission by the State. Such permis sion must be gra nted unless there are reasonable restriction imposed on valid grounds in terms of Articl es 15 and 16 of the Constitution. In other words , the right of pro test cannot be denied without lawful , reasonable and proportionate grounds nor can such Executive autho rity hamper public life or injure p ublic or private property. [Ref: Suo Motu Case No.7 of 2017 (PLD 2019 SC 318)].

[30] Any violation of the balance env isaged in this behalf by the Constitution and the law is cognizable by the competent Court s for en forcement. 11. In the present case, the PT I leadership and supporte rs have presen tly withdrawn from indulging in any political prote st and rallies in Islamabad and the roads and pathways are open allowin g for free movement of the public within and to the cit y.

[31] We accordingly consider that the Const. P. -:12:- purpose of this petition filed by the Is lamabad High Court Bar Association has been served and the same has borne f ruit. It has therefore become infruct uous . Accordingly, we dispose of the same as having become infructuous. Sd/- Chief Justice Sd/- Judge Sd/- Judge I have appended my separate note.

[32] Sd/- Judge Sd/- Judge Islama bad 26.05.2022 Irshad H ussain /* NOT AP PROVED FOR REPORTING Const. P. -:13:- Yahya Afridi, J. - I have had the privilege of reading the order authored by his lordship, the Hon’ble Chief Justice of Pakist an, and agree with the conclusion that the Constitution Petition No.19 of 2022 filed by the Islamabad High Court Bar Association has become infructu ous.

[33] I also agree with th e order dismissing the Civil Miscellaneous Application No.  filed by the l earned Attorney -General for Pakistan as being misconceived. 2. Respectfully, I would like to add some observations on the maintainability of the v ery prayer made by the le arned Attorney -General for Pakistan in his miscellaneous application.

[34] The learned A ttorney -General for Pakistan has, in the application, after alleging violation of the court -order dated 25.05.2022 by the PTI leadership, made the f ollowing prayer: [T]his Court may pass prohibitory and regulatory orders so as to allow the law enforcement agencies to take action against the miscreants including but not limited to causing arrest of the miscreants.

[35] Indeed, it is a surprising prayer. Th e learned Attorney -Genera l for Pakistan, who is the principal law officer of the Federal Government, has ask ed this Court to pass “prohibitory and regulatory orders” to maintain the law and order situation in Pakistan. The prayer made is against the very p rinciple of trichotomy of powers enshrined in our Constitution, which has assigned separate roles to the thr ee organs of the State: the legislature, the executive and the judicature.

[36] To maintain law and order in the country is the domain and mandate of the executive. Thus, the ver y prayer is contrary to the constitutional mandate and is, therefore, not legally e ntertainable. 3. However, with profound respect, I disagree that there is no credible material before this Court for initiating independent contemp t proceedings against Mr.

[37] Imran Khan, who allegedly Const. P. -:14:- disobeyed1 the court -order dated 25.05.2022. The video -recording of Mr. Imran Khan’s statement was played on multimedia screen in open court during the court proceedings. The said statement is reproduced hereunder: ﺳﺎرے ﺟﺪھﺮ ﺑﮭﯽ ﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎﻧﯽ ﯾہ دﯾﮑﮭ رﮨﮯ ﮨﯿﮟ ۔ ﺧﻮﺷﺨﺒﺮی ﯾہ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﺳﭙﺮﯾﻢ ﮐﻮرٹ ﻧﮯ ﻓﯿﺼﻠہ ﮐﺮ دﯾﺎ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ اب ﮐﺴﯽ ﻗﺴﻢ ﮐﯽ رﮐﺎوٹ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﮨﻮ ﮔﯽ ﮐﻮﺋﯽ ﭘﮑﮍ دھﮑﮍ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﮨﻮ ﮔﯽ اس ﻟﯿﮯﻣﯿﮟ ﺳﺎرے ﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎﻧﯿﻮں ﮐﻮ آج ﮐﮩہ رﮨﺎ ﮨﻮں ﮐہ آج ﺷﺎم اﭘﻨﮯ ﺷﮩﺮوں ﻣﯿﮟ ﺑﮭﯽ ﻧﮑﻠﯿﮟ۔ اوراﺳﻼم آﺑﺎد اور ﭘﻨﮉی ﻣﯿﮟ ﭘﻮری ﻃﺮح ﮐﻮﺷﺶ ﮐﺮﯾﮟ ڈی ﭼﻮک ﭘﮩﻨﭽﻨﮯ ﮐﯽ آج ﺷﺎم ﮐﻮ۔ ﮐﯿﻮﻧﮑہ ﻣﯿﮟ اﻧﺸﺎء ﷲ ﮔﮭﻨﭩﮯ ڈﯾﮍھ ﺗﮏ وﮨﺎں ﭘﮩﻨﭻ ﺟﺎؤں ﮔﺎ۔ The above statement of Mr.

[38] Imran Khan, coupled with his conduct that followed thereafter in proceed ing beyond the venue decided in the order dated 25. 05.2022 for the political gathering , is in my opinion, sufficient to prima facie show that Mr. Imran Khan disobeyed the order of this Court dated 25.05.2022. 4. With profound respect, instead of calling for reports from the named officials of the State A gencies/Departments, as directed by my learned brother, I am of the opinion that there is sufficient material before this Cour t to proceed against Mr.

[39] Imran Khan for the alleged disobeyance of the court order dated 25.05.2022 passed in Constitution Petition No.19, which warrants the issuance of notice by this Court to Mr. Imran Khan to explain why contempt proceedings should not be initiated against him. I order accordingly. Sd/- Judge 1 Article 204 (2) (a) of the Constitution o f the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973.