Case No: C.P.56/2003
Case Title: M. Kowkab Iqbal . v. Govt. of Pakistan through Secretary Cabinet Division, Islamabad.
Subject: U/A 184
Judge: Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja, CJ
Judgment Date: 08-09-2015
Upload Date: 08-09-2015
Citations: PLD 2015 SC 1210
SC Citations: 2015 SCP 78
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Const.P.56_2003_U_dt_8-9-2015.pdf

[1] ORDER Jawwad S. Khawaja, CJ. - These two Constitution Petitions filed under Article 184 (3) of the Constitution of Pakistan have raised a n issue which has a direct nexus with the life of every common man and woman living in Pakistan. Mr. Muhammad Kowkab Iqbal, Petitioner in Constitution Petition No. 56 of 2003 and Syed Mahmood Akhtar Naqvi, Petitioner in Constitution Petition No. 112 of 201 2, have prayed for the implementation of Article 251 of the Constitution, which commands the state to adopt Urdu as the official language of the country and also stipulates that steps may be taken by the provinces for the promotion of provincial languages.

[2] Since both Constitution Petitions have sought similar relief, the same were heard together. 2. As the matter revolves around Article 251 of the Constitution, for ease of reference, it is reproduced as under: “National Language 251. (1) The National lang uage of Pakistan is Urdu, and arrangements shall be made for its being used for official and other purposes within fifteen years from the commencing day. (2) Subject to clause (1), the English language may be used for official purposes until arrangements a re made for its replacement by Urdu. (3) Without prejudice to the status of the National language, a Provincial Assembly may by law prescribe measures for the teaching, promotion and use of a provincial language in addition to the national language. ” (emph asis supplied) 3.

[3] The Petitioner, Mr. Kowkab Iqbal, submitted that the State and the Government are deliberately not implementing Article 251 of the Constitution and on account of the non - implementation of this provision a societal and linguistic divide h as been created in society. It was further argued that this constitutional provision was to be implemented within 15 years of the date of coming into effect of the Constitution.

[4] The said period expired in the year 1988 and while 27 years have elapsed sinc e then the said mandatory provision has still not been implemented. Similar submissions were made by the other Petitioner, Syed Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi. 4. At this juncture, we may highlight the constitutional significance of the issue raised in these petiti ons which seems to be lost on the respondent.

[5] The importance of our national language has been stressed upon in various judgments of this Court. In one of our recent Const.P.56 of 2003 3 judgments, District Bar Association, Rawalpindi Vs. Federation of Pakistan (Constitution Petition No. 12 of 2010 etc), wherein the 18th and 21st Constitutional Amendments were challenged, it was observed that: ” ﯾہ ﻓﯿﺼﻠہ آﺋﯿﻦ ﮐﮯ آرﭨﯿﮑﻞ251 ﻣﯿﮟ درج آﺋﯿﻨﯽ ﺗﻘﺎﺿﺎ ﭘﻮرا ﮐﺮﻧﮯ ﮐﯽ ﺧﺎﻃﺮ اردو ﻣﯿﮟ ﺗﺤﺮﯾﺮ ﮐﯿﺎ ﺟﺎ رﮨﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ اس ﺳﮯ ﭘﮩﻠﮯ ﺑﮭﯽ ﮨﻢ آرﭨﯿﮑﻞ251 ﮐﮯ ﻣﻨﺪرﺟﺎت ﮐﯽ اﮨﻤﯿﺖ ﮐﯽ ﻃﺮف ﺗﻮﺟہ دﻻ ﭼﮑﮯ ﮨﯿﮟ اور ﺳﺮﮐﺎری اﻣﻮر ﻣﯿﮟ ﻗﻮﻣﯽ زﺑﺎن اور ﺻﻮﺑﺎﺋﯽ زﺑﺎﻧﻮں ﮐﯽ ﺗﺮوﯾﺞ ﮐﯽ اﮨﻤﯿﺖ ﮐﻮ اُﺟﺎﮔﺮ ﮐﺮ ﭼﮑﮯ ﮨﯿﮟ۔ ﻣﻘﺪﻣہ ﺑﻌﻨﻮان ﺣﺎﻣﺪ ﻣﯿﺮ ﺑﻨﺎم وﻓﺎقِ ﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎن ) 2013 SCMR 1880 ( ﻣﯿﮟ ﺑﮭﯽ ﮨﻢ ﺑﯿﺎن ﮐﺮ ﭼﮑﮯ ﮨﯿﮟ ﮐہ ’’ﻋﺪاﻟﺘﯽ ﮐﺎررواﺋﯽ ﮐﯽ ﺳﻤﺎﻋﺖ ﻣﯿﮟ اﮐﺜﺮ ﯾہ اﺣﺴﺎس ﺷﺪت ﺳﮯ ﮨﻮﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﮐﺌﯽ دﮨﺎﺋﯿﻮں ﮐﯽ ﻣﺤﻨﺖِ ﺷﺎﻗہ اور ﮐﺌﯽ ﺑﮯ ﻧﻮا ﻧﺴﻠﻮں ﮐﯽ ﮐﺎوﺷﻮں ﮐﮯ ﺑﺎوﺟﻮد آج ﺑﮭﯽ اﻧﮕﺮﯾﺰی ﮨﻤﺎرے ﮨﺎں ﺑﮩﺖ ﮨﯽ ﮐﻢ ﻟﻮﮔﻮں ﮐﯽ زﺑﺎن ﮨﮯ۔ اور اﮐﺜﺮ ﻓﺎﺿﻞ وﮐﻼء اور ﺟﺞ ﺻﺎﺣﺒﺎن ﺑﮭﯽ اس ﻣﯿﮟ اﺗﻨﯽ ﻣﮩﺎرت ﻧﮩﯿﮟ رﮐﮭﺘﮯ ﺟﺘﻨﯽ ﮐہ درﮐﺎر ﮨﮯ۔ ﻧﺘﯿﺠہ ﯾہ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ آﺋﯿﻦ اور ﻗﺎﻧﻮن ﮐﮯ ﻧﺴﺒﺘﺎً ﺳﺎدﮦ ﻧﮑﺘﮯ ﺑﮭﯽ اﻧﺘﮩﺎﺋﯽ ﭘﯿﭽﯿﺪﮦ اور ﻧﺎﻗﺎﺑﻞِ ﻓﮩﻢ ﻣﻌﻠﻮم ﮨﻮﺗﮯ ﮨﯿﮟ۔ ﯾہ ﻓﻨﯽ ﭘﯿﭽﯿﺪﮔﯽ ﺗﻮ اﭘﻨﯽ ﺟﮕہ ﻣﮕﺮ آرﭨﯿﮑﻞ 251 ﮐﮯ ﻋﺪم ﻧﻔﺎذ ﮐﺎ اﯾﮏ ﭘﮩﻠﻮ اس ﺳﮯ ﺑﮭﯽ ﮐﮩﯿﮟ زﯾﺎدﮦ ﺗﺸﻮﯾﺸﻨﺎک ﮨﮯ۔ ﮨﻤﺎرا آﺋﯿﻦ ﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎن ﮐﮯ ﻋﻮام ﮐﯽ اس ﺧﻮاﮨﺶ ﮐﺎ ﻋﮑﺎس ﮨﮯ ﮐہ وﮦ ﺧﻮد ﭘﺮ ﻻﮔﻮﮨﻮﻧﮯ واﻟﮯ ﺗﻤﺎم ﻗﺎﻧﻮﻧﯽ ﺿﻮاﺑﻂ اور اﭘﻨﮯ آﺋﯿﻨﯽ ﺣﻘﻮق ﮐﯽ ﺑﺎﺑﺖ ﺻﺎدر ﮐﯿﮯ ﮔﯿﮯ ﻓﯿﺼﻠﻮں ﮐﻮ ﺑﺮاﮦِ راﺳﺖ ﺳﻤﺠﮭﻨﺎ ﭼﺎﮨﺘﮯ ﮨﯿﮟ۔ وﮦ ﯾہ ﭼﺎﮨﺘﮯ ﮨﯿﮟ ﮐہ ﺣﮑﻤﺮان ﺟﺐ اُن ﺳﮯ ﻣﺨﺎﻃﺐ ﮨﻮں ﺗﻮ اﯾﮏ ﭘﺮاﺋﯽ زﺑﺎن ﻣﯿﮟ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ، ﺑﻠﮑہ ﻗﻮﻣﯽ ﯾﺎ ﺻﻮﺑﺎﺋﯽ زﺑﺎن ﻣﯿﮟ ﮔﻔﺘﮕﻮ ﮐﺮﯾﮟ۔ ﯾہ ﻧہ ﺻﺮف ﻋﺰتِ ﻧﻔﺲ ﮐﺎ ﻣﻄﺎﻟﺒہ ﮨﮯ ﺑﻠﮑہ ان ﮐﮯ ﺑﻨﯿﺎدی ﺣﻘﻮق ﻣﯿﮟ ﺷﺎﻣﻞ ﮨﮯ اور دﺳﺘﻮر ﮐﺎ ﺑﮭﯽ ﺗﻘﺎﺿﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ اﯾﮏ ﻏﯿﺮ ﻣﻠﮑﯽ زﺑﺎن ﻣﯿﮟ ﻟﻮﮔﻮں ﭘﺮ ﺣﮑﻢ ﺻﺎدر ﮐﺮﻧﺎ ﻣﺤﺾ اﺗﻔﺎق ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﯾہ ﺳﺎﻣﺮاﺟﯿﺖ ﮐﺎ اﯾﮏ ﭘﺮاﻧﺎ اور آزﻣﻮدﮦ ﻧﺴﺨہ ﮨﮯ۔ ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ ﮨﻤﯿﮟ ﺑﺘﺎﺗﯽ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﯾﻮرپ ﻣﯿﮟ اﯾﮏ ﻋﺮﺻﮯ ﺗﮏ ﮐﻠﯿﺴﺎﺋﯽ ﻋﺪاﻟﺘﻮں ﮐﺎ راج رﮨﺎ ﺟﮩﺎں ﺷﺮع و ﻗﺎﻧﻮن ﮐﺎ ﺑﯿﺎن ﺻﺮف ﻻﻃﯿﻨﯽ زﺑﺎن ﻣﯿﮟ ﮨﻮﺗﺎ ﺗﮭﺎ، ﺟﻮ راﮨﺒﻮں اور ﺷﮩﺰادوں ﮐﮯ ﺳﻮا ﮐﺴﯽ ﮐﯽ زﺑﺎن ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ﺗﮭﯽ۔ ﯾﮩﺎں ﺑﺮﺻﻐﯿﺮ ﭘﺎک و ﮨﻨﺪ ﻣﯿﮟ آرﯾﺎﺋﯽ ﻋﮩﺪ ﻣﯿﮟ ﺣﮑﻤﺮان ﻃﺒﻘﮯ ﻧﮯ ﻗﺎﻧﻮن ﮐﻮ ﺳﻨﺴﮑﺮت ﮐﮯ ﺣﺼﺎر ﻣﯿﮟ ﻣﺤﺪود ﮐﺮ دﯾﺎ ﺗﺎ ﮐہ ﺑﺮﮨﻤﻨﻮں ، ﺷﺎﺳﺘﺮﯾﻮں اور ﭘﻨﮉﺗﻮں ﮐﮯ ﺳﻮا ﮐﺴﯽ ﮐﮯ ﭘﻠﮯ ﮐﭽﮫ ﻧہ ﭘﮍے۔ ﺑﻌﺪ ﻣﯿﮟ درﺑﺎری اور ﻋﺪاﻟﺘﯽ زﺑﺎن اﯾﮏ ﻋﺮﺻہ ﺗﮏ ﻓﺎرﺳﯽ رﮨﯽ ﺟﻮ ﺑﺎدﺷﺎﮨﻮں، ﻗﺎﺿﯿﻮں اور رﺋﯿﺴﻮں ﮐﯽ ﺗﻮ زﺑﺎن ﺗﮭﯽ ﻟﯿﮑﻦ ﻋﻮام ﮐﯽ زﺑﺎن ﻧہ ﺗﮭﯽ۔ اﻧﮕﺮﯾﺰوں ﮐﮯ ﻏﻠﺒﮯ ﮐﮯ ﺑﻌﺪ ﻻرڈ ﻣﯿﮑﺎﻟﮯ ﮐﯽ ﺗﮩﺬﯾﺐ دﺷﻤﻦ ﺳﻮچ ﮐﮯ زﯾﺮِ ﺳﺎﯾہ ﮨﻤﺎری ﻣﻘﺎﻣﯽ اور ﻗﻮﻣﯽ زﺑﺎﻧﻮں ﮐﯽ ﺗﺤﻘﯿﺮ ﮐﺎ اﯾﮏ ﻧﯿﺎ ﺑﺎب ﺷﺮوع ﮨﻮا ﺟﻮ ﺑﺪﻗﺴﻤﺘﯽ ﺳﮯ آج ﺗﮏ ﺟﺎری ﮨﮯ۔ اور ﺟﺲ ﮐﮯ ﻧﺘﯿﺠہ ﻣﯿﮟ اﯾﮏ ﻃﺒﻘﺎﺗﯽ ﺗﻔﺮﯾﻖ ﻧﮯ ﺟﻨﻢ ﻟﯿﺎ ﮨﮯ ﺟﺲ ﻧﮯ اﯾﮏ ﻗﻠﯿﻞ ﻟﯿﮑﻦ ﻗﻮی اور ﻏﺎﻟﺐ اﻗﻠﯿﺖ )ﺟﻮ اﻧﮕﺮﯾﺰی ﺟﺎﻧﺘﯽ ﮨﮯ اور ﻋﻨﺎنِ ﺣﮑﻮﻣﺖ ﺳﻨﺒﮭﺎﻟﮯ ﮨﻮﺋﮯ ﮨﮯ( اور ﻋﻮام اﻟﻨﺎس )ﺟﻮ اﻧﮕﺮﯾﺰی ﺳﮯ آﺷﻨﺎ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ( ﮐﮯ درﻣﯿﺎن اﯾﮏ اﯾﺴﯽ ﺧﻠﯿﺞ ﭘﯿﺪا ﮐﺮ دی ﮨﮯ ﺟﻮ ﮐﺴﯽ ﺑﮭﯽ ﻃﻮر ﻗﻮﻣﯽ ﯾﮏ ﺟﮩﺘﯽ ﮐﮯ ﻟﯿﮯ ﺳﺎزﮔﺎر ﻧﮩﯿﮟ۔ آﺋﯿﻦ ﭘﺎﮐﺴﺘﺎن اﻟﺒﺘہ ﮨﻤﺎرے ﻋﻮام ﮐﮯ ﺳﯿﺎﺳﯽ اور ﺗﮩﺬﯾﺒﯽ ﺷﻌﻮر ﮐﺎ ﻣﻨہ ﺑﻮﻟﺘﺎ ﺛﺒﻮت ﮨﮯ، ﺟﻨﮭﻮں ﻧﮯ آرﭨﯿﮑﻞ 251 اور آرﭨﯿﮑﻞ28 ﻣﯿﮟ ﻣﺤﮑﻮﻣﺎﻧہ ﺳﻮچ ﮐﻮ ﺧﯿﺮ ﺑﺎد ﮐہ دﯾﺎ ﮨﮯ، اور ﺣﮑﻤﺮاﻧﻮں ﮐﻮ ﺑﮭﯽ ﺗﺤﮑّﻤُﺎﻧہ رﺳﻢ و رواج ﺗﺮک ﮐﺮﻧﮯ اور ﺳُﻨﺖِ ﺧﺎدﻣﺎﻧہ اﭘﻨﺎﻧﮯ ﮐﺎ ﻋﻨﺪﯾہ دﯾﺎ ﮨﮯ۔ آﺋﯿﻦ ﮐﯽ ﺗﺸﺮﯾﺢ ﺳﮯ ﻣﺘﻌﻠﻖ ﻓﯿﺼﻠﮯ اُردو ﻣﯿﮟ ﺳُﻨﺎﻧﺎ ﯾﺎ ﮐﻢ از ﮐﻢ ان ﮐﮯ ﺗﺮاﺟﻢ اردو ﻣﯿﮟ ﮐﺮاﻧﺎ اﺳﯽ ﺳﻠﺴﻠﮯ ﮐﯽ اﯾﮏ ﭼﮭﻮﭨﯽ ﺳﯽ ﮐﮍی ﮨﮯ۔ ﻋﺪاﻟﺖِ ﻋﻈﻤﯽٰ ﻧﮯ اﺳﯽ ﮐﮍی ﮐﻮ آﮔﮯ ﺑﮍھﺎﻧﮯ ﮐﮯ ﻟﯿﮯ اﯾﮏ ﺷﻌﺒۂ ﺗﺮاﺟﻢ ﺑﮭﯽ ﻗﺎﺋﻢ ﮐﯿﺎ ﮨﮯ ﺟﻮ ﻋﺪاﻟﺘﯽ ﻓﯿﺼﻠﻮں ﮐﻮ ﻋﺎم ﻓﮩﻢ زﺑﺎن ﻣﯿﮟ ﻣﻨﺘﻘﻞ ﮐﺮﺗﺎ ﮨﮯ‘‘۔ﯾﮩﺎں اس اﻣﺮ ﮐﺎ اﻋﺎدﮦ ﻧﮩﺎﯾﺖ ﺿﺮوری ﮨﮯ ﮐہ ﯾہ ﮨﻤﺎری ﭘﺴﻨﺪ ﻧﺎ ﭘﺴﻨﺪ ﮐﺎ ﻣﻌﺎﻣﻠہ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ اور ﻧہ ﮨﯽ ﮨﻤﺎری ﺗﻦ آﺳﺎﻧﯽ ﮐﺎ ﺑﻠﮑہ ﯾہ آﺋﯿﻨﯽ ﺣﮑﻢ ﮨﮯ ﮐہ اردو ﮐﻮ ﺑﻄﻮر ﺳﺮﮐﺎری زﺑﺎن اور ﺑﺮاﺋﮯ دﯾﮕﺮ اﻣﻮر ﯾﻘﯿﻨﯽ ﺑﻨﺎﯾﺎ ﺟﺎﺋﮯ اور ﺻﻮﺑﺎﺋﯽ زﺑﺎﻧﻮں ﮐﯽ ﺗﺮوﯾﺞ ﮐﯽ ﺟﺎﺋﮯ۔ ‘‘ Const.P.56 of 2003 4 5.

[6] Indeed the importance of this issu e cannot be emphasized enough. Yet, the way in which this issue is being dealt with by the Government has been very casual and non serious. 6. During the course of this year alone, these petitions have come up for hearing before this Court eighteen times. However, despite the time the Court dedicated to this crucial issue, no substantial progress was made.

[7] On 12.05.2015, for instance, Mr. Abdul Rashid Awan, DAG for the Federation, clearly submitted that in spite of his best efforts the Secretary Cabinet an d the Secretary Information, Government of Pakistan, and other concerned functionaries were not paying any heed to the Constitutional imperative in Article 251.

[8] Although, reports were filed in Court thereafter, with regret we say that these reports were no t satisfactory and no substantial action has been taken by the concerned authorities for the implementation of Article 251 of the Constitution. The same is the situation till now. 7. Almost all orders of the Court in the present case portray this dismal s ituation and lack of interest by the concerned functionaries in implementing the command of Article 251 of the Constitution.

[9] The following synopsis of only some of the Court orders over the last seven months will demonstrate this: S# Order dated Synopsis o f Court order and related submissions 1 22.01.2015 Mr. Abdul Rasheed Awan, learned DAG, requested for some time to submit a concise statement. 2 10.04.2015 The learned law officer was unable to give any satisfactory reply why the breach of Article 251 ha d not been rectified yet.

[10] In order to ascertain causes of delay he once again requested for some time. 3 23.04.2015 Learned law officer sought time to file a more comprehensive statement. 4 30.04.2015 Learned law officer once again sought time to file co ncise statement. 5 12.05.2015 Learned law officer stated that despite his best efforts the Secretary Cabinet and the Secretary Information, Government of Pakistan, and other concerned functionaries were not paying heed to the matter and to the orders of t his Court. 6. 13.05.2015 Learned Attorney General appeared and assured that if some time is given to the Government then solid suggestions shall be presented for implementation of Article 251 of the Constitution.

[11] Const.P.56 of 2003 5 7. 20.05.2015 The Court observed that at titude of Federal Govt. was non -serious. Learned DAG sought time to file his report. Rs. 10,000/ - costs were also imposed on the Federal Govt. 8. 02.06.2015 Despite orders, the Federal Government was unable to explain what steps had been taken over the la st 42 years for implementation of Article 251 and who was responsible for such omission. 9. 05.06.2015 It was observed that Punjabi language was not being given its place by the Government of the Punjab and no substantial steps had been taken for this pur pose although in the other Provinces concrete steps had been taken. 10. 11.06.2015 Secretary Information stated that summary with suggestions had been sent to Secretary Cabinet for implementation of Article 251.

[12] Assistant Advocate General Punjab requeste d for some time to file report. 11. 02.07.2015 Decision of Cabinet awaited; Case was adjourned. 12. 10.07.2015 Cabinet decision still pending as Prime Minister is out of country. 13. 11.08.2015 Secy. Information informed the Court that vide letter date d 06.07.2015 certain directions have been issued by the Govt.

[13] Mr. Sikandar Javed, Chairman GEC informed the Court that the Law Ministry was neither taking any interest in the legal dictionary made by them to facilitate Urdu translation of laws nor was it r endering any financial assistance. 14. 18.08.2015 Court still not informed of satisfactory arrangements by the Government. 8.

[14] This record shows that other than words, no progress has been made for implementation of Article 251 of the Constitution. The Go vernment appears to be acting on the untenable premise that it has the right not to adhere to Article 251 of the Constitution. This is most disturbing. The language of Article 251 leaves no room for such an interpretation.

[15] Article 251 uses the term “shall” , which shows that it is a mandatory provision and not an optional or directory one. Defiance of Article 251 should not be allowed . 9. Here we may advert to Article 5 of the Constitution which stipulates that “… obedience to the Constitution and law is th e inviolable obligation of every citizen …”.

[16] It also needs to be emphasized that all senior functionaries of the State take an oath to “preserve protect and defend the Constitution” . State functionaries in positions of authority therefore, cannot give sho rt shrift to the Constitution which they are bound to preserve, protect and obey. On various occasions we have pointed out that the rule of law begins with the powerful; if the Const.P.56 of 2003 6 Government itself does not follow the commands of the Constitution then it cann ot legitimately exercise authority to enforce the law on the general public. 10.

[17] In the case of Sindh High Court Bar Association Vs. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2009 SC 876 at 1242) this Court has remarked that it “ would … be for the representatives of t he people and for all thinking people to determine if the absence of the rule of law within the upper echelons and formal structures of the State has, in a significant way, generated the lawlessness whi ch so permeates our society today.” The lack of inter est shown by the Government to the constitutional command contained in Article 251 directly feeds into the lawlessness that prevails in our society.

[18] Here it may be useful for us to take guidance from a famous incident involving Baba Farid Ganj Shakar. 11. A mother brought her child to Baba Sahib with a complaint that her son was eating too much ‘ shakar ’ and should be cautioned against this habit. Baba Sahib asked that lady to bring the child again after one week.

[19] When she brought her son again, Baba Sahib forbade the child and he obeyed. The woman asked Baba Sahib why he did not just forbid the child when she had visited last. Baba Sahib replied that at that time he himself was copiously consuming ‘ shakar ’ and therefore, could not have asked the child to ab stain.

[20] This wisdom seems to be lost on those in Government. 12. What is also lost on the Government is that Article 251 is not a stand -alone provision;. this provision is directly linked to the realization of various fundamental rights protected by the C onstitution, especially the right to dignity (Article 14), the right to equal treatment under the law (Article 25), and the right to education (Article 25A).

[21] It is a corollary of a person’s right to dignity enshrined in the Constitution that his or her language (national or provincial) should be respected and recognized by the State which exercises authority over him or her. Likewise, it is a corollary of a person’s right to equality that he or she must not be denied access to economic and political oppor tunities because he or she is only conversant in the languages recognized and referred to in Article 251 and not conversant with the English language.

[22] When the state refuses to recognize this it denies to its citizens equality of status and opportunity and also their dignity in a very real sense. 13. There is also no doubt that the right to education has a direct link with language. Article 25A of the Constitution states that the “ State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of five to sixteen years in such manner as may be determined by Const.P.56 of 2003 7 law.” Empirical studies throughout the world (including those by UNESCO) advocate the use of a child’s native language in instruction since this is the language the child grows up with and wh ich is in use in his home and around him.

[23] But the Government seems to be ignoring this important issue. 14. We may also note here that it is not as if the Government lacks the imagination or expertise to conceive ways in which Article 251 may be imple mented. For instance, even in 1981 certain recommendations were made by the National Language Authority, (presently renamed as National Language Promotion Department vide Notification dated 17.08.2012), for implementation of Article 251.

[24] The same are repro duced herein below: ز܉ن和㣡 وغ㘄 ادارہ) ز܉ن 和㣡 رہ决 ( ت⹢ر⪋ 㷨١٨٩١ء )䚴ا( ت⹢ر⪋ 啵 ㆼ 㺸 嬸Ⴤ ا㱾 اردو࿀ ر㊓ 㺸 رو܉رى ز܉ن㥃 ى اور㗇دُ )i( 嬸 ن㨾ຩ رウ ِ١٨٩١ ࿀ ر㊓ 㺸 رو܉رى ز܉ن㥃 ى اور㗇 د㱾 وار اردو☟亾 㺸 㨱 رى᱑ 扭 آرڈ愡 ا啵 ءُ 愡 ا䰋 㺸 嬸Ⴤ ا ۔承㨱 رى᱑ 吶ٱĴƶǔŰļš )ii( ١٨٩١۔ 很᱑ 㷩 م㥃 㥃 悇婧 ㄰➶ رى اورᣳ 㷨 دہ侬 ،承 روداد啵 اردو ز܉نᚪ م⛻ ا㺸 ءُ )iii( ٢٨٩١ وہ 㲁 嵖‹ 㱾 䱰◾ ۔㻠 很᱑ 峤 م㥃 弥ᡁ⋏ ᥉ 後ᚓ 㥃 找م د囑ر ا吴ى ا㗇 د啵 اردو ز܉نᚪ م⛻ ا㺸 ءُ 幥ᥴ اردوُ ے۔㨱 屨ا㘄 ز㛼 䰋 㺸 ارى恔✭ 㷨 倮 )iv( ٣٨٩١م ᝯ 㺸 رウ ان技 ࣪ل ا志忚⵴ 㣰㖵 اور و䆎 徃᱑ 㺶 رᣳ 啵 ت اور اردو ز܉ن᱑ ㄰➶ مᝯ 㺸 ن恚 ڈو๞㥃 ᚪ ءُِ ۔徃᱑ 抜م د囑 ا啵 ر اردو ز܉ن吴اُ )ب( 䰋 㺸 嬸Ⴤ اᘌ 惣ر ذرण 㱾 اردوُ ت⹢ر⪋ )i( ٤٨٩١ 志哵嚕 اी 㺸 ء)م 㥃 弥، آⴣ 恛 ا惱 اے، ا惱ا( 䰋 㺸 ൝ 憗 ا憗 اور ا恕 ا൝ م،㥃 懓 اے، ا൝ ،吶႙ ڈ婨 واراጸ ۔峤 啵 اردو ز܉نᘌ 惣ذرُ )ii( ٦٨٩١ ا 憗 اے اور ا൝ ൝ ،恕 ا懓م، ا㥃 懓 اے، ا懓 اى، ا൝ ،ⴣ 恛 ا懓، اⴣ 恛 ا൝ ी 㺸 ء 啵 ت اردو ز܉ن嗚䲅م اᝯ 㺸 懓 ا憗ُ ں۔峤 )iii( ٧٨٩١ں۔ 峤 厫 啵 اردو೧ ت嗚䲅 ا㺸 اے൝ 懓 اور اⴣ 恛 ا懓 اी 㺸 ءُ )iv( 㺸 اردو࿀ ر㊓ 㺸 ز܉ن㷨 恛رᔇ ۔很᱑㷩 廫㞑 ل⫦ ڈل اردو䰮 愡 ا啵 ن恚 ڈو愡 ا寄 㷨 劖 㲁 ᣗ 䅋 㷨 رش⪋ ೧ 抁 ُُ ل ⤔ا 愡 ا㥃 ت䆨冬 媚 مᝯ اور很᱑ 㷩 ᷗᔊ اردو㥃 ت䆨冬 㺸 ڈى怡 اኸ مᝯ ۔徃᱑ 弥ا㨱 厫 ࿄㪂 ور䰋 㺸 找وغ د㘄 㱾 ُ ۔很᱑ 㷨 ⽠ ヸ⚉ 㷨 م㣱 㺸 ں䪫⫦ 㺸 ᘌ 惣ى ذر恙妛 ا嫃 很᱑ 徉ار د㟥 ورىㆈ 戇 د啵 اردو㄰➶ ُ )ج( 啵 ت嗚䲅 ا㺸 ો冬 ت⹢ر⼒ 䰋 㺸 嬸૾ ر㌀ ا惣 ذر㱾 اردوُ )i( 娛 㫣 㺸 ᳮ 嵖‹ 嗚峤 ⋐࿀ 和ز䆨 愡 ا㥃 اردو㑃 啵 ت嗚䲅 ا㺸 ો冬 ُ٠٥ ں۔峤 Const.P.56 of 2003 8 )ii( 㺸 ᳮ 很᱑ 徉ا㨱 رف䲴 ⋐࿀ رى✔ ا愡 ا㥃 اردو ادبُ ٠٠٢ں۔峤 娛 )iii( ر㊓ رى㜌 㱾 اردو䰋 㺸 ت嗚䲅 ا㺸 ો冬 ُ۔ 徃᱑ 抜 د啵 ى恙妛ت اردو اور ا᱑ ⋐࿀ مᝯ اور很᱑ 徉Ⴤ ا࿀ ر㊓ 㺸 ز܉ن࿀ ُ Various other committees have been formed and recommendations submitted from time to time.

[25] What is lacking therefore is not imagination or expertise, but the will to preserv e, protect, defend and obey the Constitution . 15. Even as these petitions were being heard, vide letter No. 1/Prog/2015 dated 06.07.2015 issued by Government of Pakistan, Cabinet Secretariat, the Cabinet Division directed that certain short term measures be taken by all Ministries and Divisions.

[26] The letter for ease of reference is being reproduced as under: "ن㨾ຩ 䴯◾ ن恚 ڈو๞㥃،志ᦵ⵴ ๞㥃 娛 1/Prog /2015 ⠪ر吴6 弥䆨Ṏ 2015ء ان㑥 : ت䰮噣 ا䲾 㺸 ل⤔ ا㺸 اردو ز܉ن䬈 㺸 ウ冬 憇رى و د㥃⨭ ᮨ آر㥃 ن㨾ຩ 彫، آ㻠 峤 啵 㐇 㺸 آپ㲁 ῇ 251 㺸 ウ冬 憇رى اور د㥃⨭ 㺸 اردو ز܉ن Ꮉ㨱 ㅨᚎ 㥃 ل⤔ ا䬈 ۔嵗 ا寃 䚴 㲁 Ṏ 嵗 徉䰮㘄 ر厦 㐽 店䆨 嬸 ن㨾ຩ ㎨ ا恗ب وز䰭 ت㍛ 啵 ⭒ ۔ اس嵗 2 ۔徃᱑ 徇 د㨱 وع⻑ ت䰮ا㟣 ا࿀ ر㊓ رى㜌 䬈 㺸 嬸㨱 人 درآ㐽 ࿀ 㐽 店䆨 卹 㲁 嵗 ارش㽽 ا寃 ⮌ا亾 惣۔ ࢐ر )ن ⛪ 囬 ارم ا㦪ڈا( Ṏىᦵ⵴ 弅ا)๞㥃( 㺸 ں婧恚ں اور ڈوᠢم وزارᝯ نⓧで رج圢 ا恙忚⵴ 悦恕 اور ا恙忚⵴ ع㉗ ا很 ࢑ا夊: 1 م آ܉د⬧ ، ا㘇 آ㎨ ا恗، وز㎨ ا恗 وز很ى ࢑ا忚⵴ ۔ 2 م آ܉د⬧ن ا㨾ຩ 䴯◾ ᰴ ور和㣡 ت و徉堌 ت،㌑㉗ى وزارت ا忚⵴ بᷪ 䱰۔ ࡢِ 䆨㐽 店 رى㜌/ ت䰮ا㟣 اᣲ人 㢭: Const.P.56 of 2003 9 ١م ادارے ᝯ 䰍 وا嬸㨱 م㥃 م噣 ا恗 ز㺸 ق㖵۔ و)رى 㥃⨭ 嬏 رى و㥃⨭ ( 庾⹢ ᷗᔊ ر اردو垆 ا㺸 ہ䰮 ᥉ 㥃 ں䮆ຩ ᄣاُ ۔承㨱 ٢ ادارے 䰍 وا嬸㨱 م㥃 م噣 ا恗 ز㺸 ق㖵۔ و)رى 㥃⨭ 嬏 رى و㥃⨭ ( 啵 ہ䰮 ᥉ ᷗᔊ اردو㥃 嬜ا㣡 مᝯ ُ۔ 承㨱 庾⹢ ٣م ادارے ᝯ 䰍 وا嬸㨱 م㥃 م噣 ا恗 ز㺸 䱰◾ 㣰㖵۔ و)رى 㥃⨭ 嬏 رى و㥃⨭ ( ى恙妛 ا啵 ہ䰮 ᥉ رم㖵 㺸 ح㈲ 寄 ۔承㨱 屨ا㘄 ೧ 啵 اردوᡀ⡜ 㺸 ُ ٤ہ 㖓ں و๑ اداروں،ᘏ ں،㱾رຩ ں،䪫寍 ں،婧ᡁ ں،䋷ا㍗ 䵨 ںᵦ 㷨 岤 ا和ا㑴 مᝯ ۔ 䰋 㺸 弥娚 راہ啵 ۔䆎 徃᱑ 㺶 اں恙ر آو垆 ا㺸 ہ䰮 ᥉ رڈୢ ೧ 啵 اردوᡀ⡜ ᡀ⡜ 㺸 ى恙妛ا ٥ن، 㨾ຩ آف㯜 䮲، ا䅠 弥Ⳣ ا،྾ن، وا㨾ຩ ل آفḏ 忚 آر، آڈኸ ᾜ ، اےᮜ 奏 ا乇 ،㘇رٹ آ⣄ຩ ۔ Ⱀ ںઝ Ų 技 اور庨䆨 妉径ڈراǗƷŐǎƶǗƱ ت᱑را垆م اᝯ 㺸 رٹ⣄ຩ ۔承㨱 屨ا㘄 啵 اردو啵 ہ䰮 ᥉ ات恙و⣝م دᝯ ُ ۔徃᱑ 㺶 匥 ೧ 啵 اردوᡀ⡜ 㺸 ى恙妛اُ ٦م ادارے ᝯ 䰍 وا嬸㨱 م㥃 م噣 ا恗 ز㺸 䱰◾ 㣰㖵۔ و)رى 㥃⨭ 嬏 رى و㥃⨭ ( 幱⡜ 徊 وᄣا) Website ( ہ䰮 ᥉ 㨱 匥 啵 ر اردو垆 ا㺸۔承 ٧ 㺸 ى恙妛ر ا垆 ا㺸 ہ䰮 ᥉ رڈୢ 弃⡜ 堶 ⸞ ض㓲 㷨 弥娚 راہ࿀ روں㯵 㺸 ں峤ا寄⹢ ࢓ى᭛⏢ 啵 劖 رےᄯ ۔ ۔徃᱑ 㺶 堶 ೧ 啵 اردوᡀ⡜ ُ ٨ت 律ᚓ رى㥃⨭ مᝯ ۔/۔ 很᱑ 㷨 وع⻑ 啵 ر اردو垆 ا㺸 ہ䰮 ᥉ وار☟ا亾 弥رروا㥃 㷨 ں䯽⤣اُ ٩勷 رウ ۔ 㥃 م㥃 اور اس承㨱 恗رᚎ 啵 اردو寄ر اور ܉垆 ا㺸 劖 㘍ے اور ا弎娚 رى㥃⨭ 㣰㖵م وᝯ اور㎨ ا恗، وزُ ۔很᱑ 徉 د㨱 ز㓈ر آ垆 ا㺸 ہ䰮 ᥉ وار☟亾 ٠١ 㷨 准 和㣡 اس㲁 Ꮉ 很᱑ دى⚜ ى㨳亾 㱾 ز܉ن和㣡 وغ㘄 ادارہ啵 ⭒ 㺸 忺وᔊ ذ و墹 㺸 ۔ اردوِ ُ 㺸 ޤ آورى ⬍ ᱑ 㷩 دورᵸ ازᵸ ⸞ 感㈲ ᰂ吴 㱾 ںᩝو㥃 ر㷨 ⥴را’’۔ It remains to be seen to what extent these directions will be followed. 16.

[27] We may also emphasize here that implementing Article 251 is not just a matter of obeying the Consti tution: it has real practical implications for the Pakistani public. In this regard, we may refer to a highly relevant historical fact. In 1972, the provincial government in Balochistan led by the Chief Minister and the provincial government in North West Frontier Province (now KPK) led by the Chief Minister Maulana Mufti Mahmud took some concrete steps towards introducing Urdu as the official language in their respective Provinces.

[28] A note by a former Chief Secretary of NWFP (now KPK) highlights the fact t hat as a result, available human and financial resources of both provincial governments were optimized. Again in 2004, the government in KPK introduced the National language for official and other purposes. In addition, the use of Urdu as the official lang uage augmented the self esteem of civil servants employed by the two Governments.

[29] At that time, it was Const.P.56 of 2003 10 immediately noticed that this measure remarkably improved the efficiency of the concerned provincial governments: even an Assistant in BS -11 was able to initiate notings in Urdu which was a language he was educated and familiar with. The very same activity and perhaps with a lesser quality, is now being undertaken by a Section Officer in BS -17 (since official noting is required to be in the English languag e). 17.

[30] In the governance of the Federation and the Provinces there is hardly any n ecessity for the use of the colonial language which cannot be understood by the public at large. Even for many civil servants and public officials, who may have received ed ucation in English, this language would in most cases, not be the language most used by them.

[31] Many officials are therefore forced to spend time on attempting to initiate and take decisions in a language which they are not entirely comfortable with. The tim e thus spent is quite wasteful because a lot of energy is dedicated to deciphering the language of the noting (which could have been easily drafted in the Urdu language) itself rather than understanding its content or substance.

[32] This wasteful exercise at t imes results in absurd and farcical outcomes which would be wholly avoided by use of the National language. 18. It is not at all the object of this judgment to denigrate the importance of English as a language used in international commerce and other activities which require the use of that language.

[33] The point before us as noted above is very different. Article 5(2) of the Constitution commands that “ [o]bedience to the Constitution and law is the inviolable obligation of every citizen … ”. We are tasked to both obey the Constitution and to enforce it, and we cannot shy away from our obligation to the same while the nation suffers even if some may (from habit or training) find it more conve nient to continue using the colonial language. 19.

[34] Therefore, be aring in mind the constitutional commands in Articles 5 and 251 reproduced above and noting the inaction and failure of successive governments to implement this important provision, we have no option but to order as under: - i) the provisions of Article 25 1 shall be implemented with full force and without unnecessary delay by the Federal and Provincial Governments; ii) the time -lines (given in letter dated 06.07.2015 reproduced above) which are given by the Government itself must be considered for Const.P.56 of 2003 11 implement ation by the Government in line with Article 251 for implementation ; iii) the Federal Government as well as Provincial Governments should coordinate with each other for uniformity in the “rasmulkhat” for the National language; iv) Federal as well as provincial laws should be translated in the National languages within three months; v) statutory, regulatory and oversight bodies shall take steps to implement Article 251 without unnecessary delay and also ensure compliance by regulatees; vi) in the competitive examinations a t Federal level the recommendations of government bodies noted above, should be considered by the Government for implementation without unnecessary delay; vii) Judgments in cases relating to public interest litigation and judgments enunciating a principle of l aw in terms of Article 1 89 must be translated in Urdu and should be published in line with Article 251 of the Constitution; viii) in Court cases government departments should make all reasonable efforts to submit their replies in Urdu to enable citizens to effectively enforce their legal rights; ix) if, subsequent to this judgment, any public bodies or public officials continue to violate the constitutional command contained in Article 251, citizens who suffer a tangible loss directly and foreseeably resu lting from such violation shall be entitled to enforce any civil rights which may accrue to them on this account . 20.

[35] Copies of this Judgment shall be sent to all the Federal as well as Provincial Secretaries, who are to take immediate steps for enforcemen t of Article 251 in line with Article 5 of the Constitution. The concerned Federal and Provincial Secretaries shall submit Const.P.56 of 2003 12 reports showing c ompliance with the above orders .

[36] The first report of progress should be fixed in Court within three months. Chief Justice Judge Judge NOTE : To meet the requirement of Article 251 of the Constitution, the Urdu version of this judgment is also issued. In view of Article 251(3), the Provinces may issue translations in provi ncial languages. (Jawwad S.

[37] Khawaja) Chief Justice Islamabad, the Announced on 8th September, 2015. M. Azhar Malik/* APPROVED FOR REPORTING.