Case No: C.P.55/2003
Case Title: Mian Muhammad Shahbaz Sharief VS Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Interior, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad & 5 others.
Subject: N/A
Judge: Mr. Justice Nazim Hussain Siddiqui, C.J.
Judgment Date: 07-04-2004
Upload Date: 07-04-2004
Citations: PLD 2004 SC 583
SC Citations: 2004 SCP 1
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/JR_Constitution_Petition_No_55_of_2003.pdf

[1] order dated 17.10.2003 of the Lahore High Court, Lahore passed in W. P. No. Nil /2003] Mian Muhammad Shahbaz Sharif … PETITIONER VERSUS The State & 2 others … RESPONDENTS For the petitioner: Malik Muhammad Qayyum, ASC. (in both petitions) A ssisted by: Mr. Nazeer Ahmed Bhutta, ASC. Mr. Shoukat Ali Mehr, ASC.

[2] Mr. Manzoor Ahmed Malik, ASC. Mr. Abdul Sattar Chughtai, ASC. Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR For respondents No. 1 & 6: Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan in Const.P. A ttorney General for Pakistan (On notice) For respondent No. 2 Syed Shabbar Raza Rizvi, in Const. P. Advocate General Punjab. & respondents Ms Afshan Ghazanfar, in CP  Assistant Advocate General.

[3] Date of hearing: 7.4.2004 JUDGMENT NAZIM HUSSAIN SIDDIQUI, C.J. - This judgment will dispose of Const. Petition No. and Civil Pe tition No.791 of 2004. Mian Muhammad Shahbaz Sharif is the petitioner in both these matters. 2. According to Const. Petition No.55 of 2003 the petitioner is curr ently the President o f Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz Group), whic h won the 1997 General Elections with an unprecedented majority.

[4] The petiti oner’s brother Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif was elected as Prime Minister of Pakistan and the pe titioner as Chief Mi nister of Punjab. 3. On 12. 10.1999, the Pakistan Ar my took over the admini stration of th e country an d the petitioner was taken into cu stody and remained as such t ill December 2000.

[5] The petitione r was involved in airplane hija cking case, but was acquitted. 4. It is alleged that in D ecember 2000, while the petiti oner was in custody, he was forced to board an airplane along with hi s other family members a nd was deported to Saudi Arabia. It is averred that the petitioner travelled to the United States of America for treatment and now a days he is in United Ki ngdom and is available at the ad dress given in the title of the petition.

[6] It is alleged that Govern ment of Pakistan to date continue s to insist that some sort of a deal exists under which the petit ioner and his family me mbers opted to live in exile, but the same is denied by him with asserti on that no such docum ent supporting such deal has ever been produced by th e government. 5.

[7] The petitioner claims that as President of Pakistan Muslim Lea gue (Nawaz Group) he has a constitutional right to participate in the political act ivities and perfor m his functions as envisaged in Article 17 of the Co nstitution of Islamic Re public of Pakistan, 1 973. He asserts that the authorities feel threatened by his presence in Pakistan.

[8] He states that the respondents are acting in flagrant disregard of the Constitution of Pakistan, which guarantees fundamental rights, principles of natural and po litical justice, etc. He has alleged that just to keep him out of politics various laws relating to political process were amended and he wa s not allowed to contest the last general elections. 6.

[9] The petitioner claims that he has all along been trying his be st to return to the country but was not allowed to do so. He stated that various high official s of the responde nts have issued clear statements to the press that he shall not be allo wed to come back to the country. According to him, though there are many such statements but the following three ar e most significant:- (1) Faisal Saleh Hayat, Federal Minister for Interior (The Daily Dawn dated 17.01.2002): “Sharifs won’t be allo wed to return…….” (2) General Pervez Musharraf (The Daily Jang dated 21.8.2002): “If they come back, Shahbaz wi ll have to go back to Saudi Arabia and Benazir B hutto to jail…….” (3) Nisar A.

[10] Memon, Informat ion Minister (The Daily Jang dated 9.8.2002): “We will not let Shahbaz Sharif come back. ” 7. On th e strength of above statements, the petit ioner claims that he has sound reasons to believe that he would not be allowed to enter Pakistan. He has emphatica lly stated that, being a citizen of Pakistan, he has every right to return to the country a nd the respondents have no lawful authority to refuse or interfere wi th his return to Pakistan.

[11] Furthe r, he claims that he apprehends that he would not be allowed to board a plane for Pakistan and in case he manages to do so, the plane would not be allowed to land in Pakistan. According to him, clear instructions to this effect have already been widely publicized in the print media includ ing Daily "Insaf" dated 23.8.2003: - “No member of the Sharif fa mily be allowed to land at any airport: Interior Ministry issues written instructions. ” It is also averred that the a pprehension of the petiti oner is strengthened by the fact that a few months back his wife an d daughters came to Lahore but were not allowed to stay and sent back to Saudi Arabia against their wishes. 8.

[12] Acco rding to Civil Petition No .791 of 2004, on 29.3.2001, a crimina l case bearing FIR No. was registered at police station Sabzazar, La hore under Sectio ns 302,365-A, 452, 148, 149, 109 PPC and Section  of Anti Terrorism Act, 1997 on the written complaint o f one Syed Uddin son of Razi Uddin, showing th e petitioner and 12 others , namely, Babar Ashraf, Zulfiqar Ahmed, Noorul Hass an, Abid Hussain, Shamshad Ah med, Munir Ahmed, Muhamma d Riaz, Manzoor Ah med, Lala Roshan, Hakim Ali, Col. (R etd) Muhammad Asghar and son of Col.

[13] Muhammad Asghar, as accused of th is case. Charge sheet in this case was submitted before Anti Terrorism Court No.III, Lahore and the petitioner was su mmoned for 10.6.2003. The summon, however, was returned by the proces s server with an endorsement that the petitioner was in Saudi Arabia and not in Pakistan.

[14] Ther eafter, on aforesaid date non- bailable warrant was issued against him and the same was also return ed by repeating the above endorsement. Learned trial Court on 17.6.2003 issued a proclamation under Section 87 Cr.P.C. agai nst him. After completion o f formalities, perpetua l warrant was issued against him by tr ial Court.

[15] The peti tioner claimed that he was totally unaware of abov e criminal proceeding and only came to know about it through newspapers. He sent a fax messag e to learned trial Court from United States and requested fo r recalling the order of proclamati on. He maintained that his ab sence was not voluntary and the Court was informed that he wa s ready to surrender before it an d that an appropriate order be passed to enable him to appear, etc.

[16] Instead, his request was tu rned down by learned trial Court vide order dated 2.8.2003. Therea fter a petition was filed befo re High Court for recalling the order, whereby he was declared proclaimed offender and perpet ual warrant of his arrest was issued, which was dismissed on 21.8.2003. 9. Giving fu rther details about the afor esaid case, petitioner st ated that the order passe d by Anti Terrorism Court No.III, Lahore, was ch allenged before Lahore High Court and the office raised an objection that the pe titioner was an absconder, ther efore, the writ petition was not competent, unless he surrendered himself.

[17] It is stated that learned counsel for the petitioner in reply to said objection wrote at the reverse of objection proforma that the office objection was not sustainable in law as it amounted to disposal of the writ petition and that the petition be fixe d before the Court. It is mentioned that the offi ce repeated the objecti on that the petitioner is booked in a murder case in which he has been declared proclaime d offender and proceedings fo r procuring his attendance are pend ing, as such, under the law he could not seek relief without surrendering himself before the Court.

[18] After great insistence of the learned c ounsel for the petitioner, the matter was put up before le arned Single Judge as an ‘objection case’, but the learned Judge upheld and sustaine d the office objection, vide order dated 17.10.2003. Hence these petitions. 10. Federati on of Pakistan in its reply/comments states that no cas e is made out fo r invoking the original jurisdiction under clause (3) of Ar ticle 184 of the Cons titution of Pakistan and no question of public importance with reference to th e enforcement of fundamental rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part-II of the Constitution has been raised.

[19] It is as serted that the case o f the petitioner is based on mere apprehension, which does not warr ant invoking the extra-ordinary jurisdiction of this Court. Further, it is stated that, at best , the case of the pet itioner is in the nature of grievances of persona l nature, which do not warrant exercise of jurisdiction of this Court under aforesaid Article of the Constitution.

[20] A plea has al so been taken that nomination papers of the petiti oner were rejected accord ing to law and that th ese issues could not be reopened in these proceedings. It is urged that legality of said FIR could not be assailed before this Court under above referred Article of th e Constitution. 11.

[21] Malik M uhammad Qayyum, ASC for the petitioner in both the petitions raised the following contentions: - (1) The petitioner, being a citizen of Pa kistan, has a natu ral and inherent right to enter and retu rn to the count ry, which is guaranteed under Article 15 of the Constitution. Un der Article 4 of the Constitution, he has a right to be d ealt with in accordance with law and is entitled to enjoy the equal protection of law.

[22] The above funda mental rights of the petitioner are being vi olated by the respondents; (2) The respondents, through the press st atements cited in the petition, have made it clear that as soon as the petitioner lands at any airport in Pakistan, he will be immediately de ported. In the recent past, the family of the petitioner was not allowed to stay in Pakistan and was deported.

[23] The petitioner understands that inst ructions have been issued to all the airports that if any member of th e Sharif family comes to Pakistan, he/she should be sent back immediately. When the petitioner comes to Pakistan, he would be immedia tely sent back and he will have no occasion to inv oke the jurisdiction of any Court in Pakistan; and (3) The order passed by the Anti-Terr orism Court in Lahore declaring the petitioner a proclaimed offender is a nullity in the eye of law as held in N.M.V.

[24] Vellayappa Chetti ar v. Alagappa Chettiar (AIR 1942 Madras 289) wherein it is laid down that where the Court is informed that the accused is out of countr y, the Court cannot declare him a proclaimed offender. Here, the pe titioner is willing and ready to surrender before the Court and face the cases against him, but he is not being allowed to do so. 12.

[25] Mr. Ma khdoom Ali Khan, learned Attorney Ge neral for Pakistan, appeared in response to the Court’s notice. In Const. Pe tition No. , learne d Attorney General for Pakistan raised the fo llowing contentions: - (1) The petition is not maintainable as it is not based on any grievance or injury suffered.

[26] It is based on speculation and apprehension. There is not a single case where the Court has exercised jurisdiction on mere apprehension; (2) The petition does not raise a question of public importance with reference to the enforcement of fundamental rights. Hence, jurisdiction of this Hon’ble Court under Article 184(3) cannot be invoked.

[27] If the scope of jurisdiction were enlarged, every habeas corpus petition would be filed in the Supreme Court; and (3) No evidentiary value is attached to a press report where a person claims a legal right on its basis. The petiti oner cannot rely on the press statements for the enforcemen t of his fundamen tal rights.

[28] The cases where this Hon’ble Court ha s taken into consideration press reports are distinguishable. 13. Syed Sh abbar Raza Rizvi, learne d Advocate General Punjab adopted the arguments advanced by the learned Attorney General for Paki stan. He submitted that the jurisdiction under Article 184(3) and Ar ticle 199 is concurrent, co-e xtensive and co-e xistent.

[29] He further submitted that in the present case, tho ugh the petition was dismissed by the High Court on technical grounds, it has not been decided on merits. If the petitioner feel s that his fundame ntal right of access to justice has been denied , he should avail the remedy provi ded under Article 199 of the Constitution. 14.

[30] In rebuttal, Malik Muhammad Qayyum, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted as under: - (1) Pursuant to the direction of the C ourt comments have been filed by the respondents. They have not a dverted to the allegations in the petition. Certain legal objections ha ve been raised. Maintainability is to be decided by the Court with the petition.

[31] On mer its, in paragraph 4, all allegations in the petition are denied. It ha s been stated that “all actions taken by the respondents are in accordance with law." This is a petition for enforcement of fund amental rights on the basis of assertions made in the petition. In Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif ’s case (PLD 1993 SC 473), the question of mainta inability was decided along with the petition; (2) In the connected matter , the petitioner had approached the High Court.

[32] The High Court held that it would not entert ain the petition unless the petitioner firs t surrendered himself; (3) Press reports, unless contradicted, are referred to in support of the respective cases. In the pres ent case, besides other State functionaries, Genera l Pervez Musharraf himself made press statements, which remain uncontrad icted to date.

[33] The petitioner wants to defend the cases against him. The right to enter, and remain in Pakistan, is a fundamental right. The respondents may arrest him, if he is required in any case; and (4) The earliest case on the evidentiary value of the press statements is Islamic Republic of Paki stan v. Abdul Wali Khan (PLD 1976 SC 57).

[34] The contents of the press statemen ts in the presen t case were never denied by the respondents. 15. It is significant to note that neither in the comments nor du ring the course of arguments the Federal Government/ Government of Punjab has disput ed the right of the petitioner being a citizen of Paki stan to come back to the c ountry nor referr ed nor brought on record any agreement/document pe rmitting the government to force the petitioner to live in exile. 16.

[35] Clause (3 ) of Article 184 and sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of Article 199 of the Constitution are for the enforcemen t of any of the funda mental rights conferred by Chapter 1 o f Part II. For their prope r appreciation, they are reproduced below: - “Article 184(3): Without prejudice to the provisi ons of Arti cle 199, the Supreme Court shall, if it considers that a question of public importance with reference to the enforcem ent of any of the Fundame ntal Rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II is i nvolved, have the power to ma ke an order of the nature mentioned in the said Article.” “Article 199(1): Subject to the Constitution, a High Court may, if it is satisfied that no other adequate remedy is provided by law, - - - - (c) on the applica tion of any aggrieved person , make an order giving such directions to any person or authority, including any Government exercising any power or performing a ny function in, or in relation to, any territory with in the jurisdiction of that Court as may be appropriate for th e enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II.” 17.

[36] Articles 199 and 184(3) regulate the jurisdiction of the Superior Courts and do not oust it. Perusal of clau se (3) of Article 184 un equivocally postulates that two conditions are precedent for invoking said clause. Firstly, th e petition must clearly demonstrate that the grievance relates to violation of fundamental rights.

[37] Seco ndly, the violation is of nature of public importance, which has been interpreted to m ean any invasion of indi vidual freedom, liberty, fundamental rights, incl uding effectiveness and safeguard for their implementatio n. Therefore, having regard to the c onnotation of the words “public importance” , the facts and circumstances of each case would have to be scrutinized on its own merits. 18.

[38] Wi th the assistance of learned counsel for the parties, we have surveyed the relevant case law. In Manzoor Elahi ’s case , (PLD 1975 SC 66), Benazir Bhutto ’s case (PLD 1988 SC 416), Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif ’s case (PLD 1993 SC 473), Wasey Zafar ’s case (PLD 1994 SC 621), I.A. Sharwani ’s case (1991 SCMR 1041) and the Employees of Pakistan Law Commission ’s v.

[39] Ministry of Works (1994 SCMR 1548), questions of general public importance, which affected the people at large, were involved. In Asad Ali ’s case (PLD 1998 SC 161), the Supreme Court entertained petition directly for the r eason that the issue af fected the judicial system of the country. The finding and conclusion of the Supreme Court in Syed Zulfiqar Mehdi v.

[40] Pakistan International Airlines Corporation (1998 SCMR 793 ) have never been deviated from. It is advantageo us to quote the relevant observation occurring at page 801 of the report, which reads as under: - “The issues arising in a case, cannot be considered as a question of public importance, if the decision of the is sues affects only the rights of an individual or a group of individuals.

[41] The issue in order to assume the character of public import ance must be such that its decision affects the rights and liberties of people at larg e. The adjective ‘public’ necessarily implies a thing belonging to people at large, the nation, the State or a community as a whole. Th erefore, if a controversy is raised in which only a particular group of people is interested and the body of the people as a whole or the entire community ha s no interest, it cannot be treated as a case of public importance.” 19.

[42] Same view has recently been taken in Watan Party ’s case (PLD 2003 SC 74). It was a 5 – member Bench judgment to which one of us (Nazim Hussai n Siddiqui, now Chief Justice) was a party, wherein re liance was placed on Manzoor Elahi ’s case and the above view was endorsed. For facility of refe rence, the relevant observations in the latter case are reproduced below: - “Now, what is meant by a question of public importan ce.

[43] The term ‘public’ is invariably employed in contradistinction to the terms private or individual, and connotes, as an adjective, someth ing pertaining to, or belonging to the people, relating to a na tion, State or community…” “The learned Attorney-General is clea rly right in saying that a case does not involve a question of publ ic importance merely b ecause it concerns the arrest and detention of an important pers on like a Member of Parliament.

[44] In order to acquire pub lic importance, the case must obviously raise a question, which is of interest to, or affects the whole body of people or an entire community.” Although the Supreme Court thereafter in a number of cases, such as Amanullah Khan v. Chairman, Medical Research Council (1995 SCMR 202) and Mrs.

[45] Shahida Za hir Abbasi v. President of Pakistan (PLD 1996 SC 632) has taken a different view, ye t the cases under Article 184(3) have been brought within the parameters of the observations referred to above. 20. Learned Attorney General took us through Article 32 of the Cons titution of India, which is pari materia with Article 184(3) of th e Constitution of Pakistan .

[46] It is noted that the words ‘ question of publ ic importance ’ are not used in Article 32 of the Constitution of India. The Constitutions of 1956 and 1962 also did not ha ve these words. There is a conscious departure and the words ‘ question of publ ic importance ’ in Article 184(3) have be en used with a purpose.

[47] The parameters of the ju risdiction under Article 18 4(3) are that the petiti on must raise a question of public importance. In India, where there is no such requireme nt, the Supreme C ourt of India, has held that if the scope of Artic le 32 of the Indian Constitution were to be enlarged, it would immensely increase the dockets of the Court.

[48] Such jurisdicti on remains with the High Court. 21. Under Ar ticle 199 wider powe rs have been co nferred upon High C ourt than Supreme Court and these powers cover more areas than a mere enforcement of Funda mental Rights. It is significant to note that under Ar ticle 184(3), Supreme Court only in terferes in cases of violation of Fundamental Rights, which are of public importance, whereas, no such c ondition is provided under Article 199.

[49] Mere fact that a question of arrest or detent ion of an impo rtant person is involved, this by itself is not en ough to invoke clause (3) of Articl e 184. What is es sential is that the question so raised must rela te to the interest of whole bod y of the people or an entire community. To put it in other wo rds, the case must be such, whic h raises a question affecting the legal rights or liabilities of the public or the comm unity at large, irrespective of the fact that who raised such question. 22.

[50] L earned Attorney General rightly contended that the present petition, at best, raises an individual grievance and if the scope of jurisdicti on under Article 184(3) were enlarged, every habeas corpus petition would be filed in the Supreme Court. However, wh ere a fundamental right has been breached, but the breach is of such a nature that it raises a question of public importance, then a petition can be directly filed in the Supreme Court.

[51] In National Steel Rolling Mill s v. Province of West Pakistan (1968 SCMR 317), it was held that the Court would not en tertain a petition, which had its basis on a premature act. Th is has recently been followed in two judgm ents by the Lahore High Court, namely, Zakariya v. Agricultural De velopment Bank of Pakistan (2002 CLD 953) and Liaqat Ali v.

[52] City Nazim (2003 MLD 1635). Clearly, the Court can be move d only when a violation of some legal or constit utional right actually takes place. 23. As far as evidentiary value of press reports is concerned, it is noted that one line of precedents in the jurisprudence of the country is that no evidentiary value is attached to the press reports and no relian ce can be placed on a press report where a person claims a legal right on its basis.

[53] The Courts do not decide cases on press reports. In the other line of authorities, such as Wali Khan ’s case , Ms Benazir Bhutto ’s case and Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif ’s case , the press reports are relied upon , but these cases are distinguishable. This Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 184(3) does not act as a Court of app eal, but as a Court of review. 24.

[54] Ba sically to believe or disbelieve the press reports is a question of fact and before reaching a positive conclusion su ch facts need to be examined, keeping in view their intrinsic value. Many such statements ar e given only for politi cal purposes, bu t the same cannot straight away be taken as proved nor at their own they create a legal righ t nor any eviden tiary value can be attached to press reports, unl ess irrefutable evidence is brought on record for esta blishing their correctness. 25.

[55] The conten tion of learned counsel fo r the petitioner that al ready instructions have been issued to all airports that if the petitioner come s back to Pakistan he shall be immediately deported back is without any tang ible evidence. No such document has been brought on record in support of this plea.

[56] It is me rely an apprehension in his mind and its legal adjudication is not possible nor it can be made a basis for invoking extr aordinary jurisdiction . Learned Attorney General for Pakistan , during the course of argum ents, repeatedly stated that an invitation would not be sent to him for returning to the country.

[57] As regards the plea that in the recent past his family members were deported, it is significant to note that neither fu ll particulars regarding alleged deportation have been brough t on record nor this plea is to be resolved by this Court within the scope of clause (3) of Article 184 of the Constitution.

[58] A petition cannot be entertained merely on apprehension whatever its nature may be. 26. Adverting to the facts of this case, it is noted that the petitioner in Const. Petition No. has not raised any question of public importance. It appears that he left the country on his own an d nothing material has been brought on record to substan tiate the assertion that he was forced to live in exile.

[59] The petitioner has prayed for a relief, which, in fact, always remained available to him an d he himself was solely responsible for not availing it earlier. Const. Peti tion No.55 of 2003 is not maintainable. 27. As far as the plea regarding declaration of the petitioner as proclaimed offender is concerned, it is noted that earl ier the petitioner had ne ver taken concrete step s for coming back to the country in spite of the fact that there was no order prohibitin g his entry in the country.

[60] As such, it would be an exercise in futility to examine the issue. Even a proclaimed offender when arrested has a right to be tried according to law and th is right cannot be take n away from him. By remaining absconder one loses certa in rights but not th e right of trial accord ing to law. Learned counsel for the petitioner, during th e course of argum ents, submitted that the petitioner is ready to face the cases registered against him and he will not mind even if he is arrested at the airport.

[61] Under the circumstances, Civil Petit ion No.791 of 2004 also fails. 28. It is not denied by learned Attorney General for Pakistan and Advocate General Punjab nor so could be denied th at Article 15 of the Constitution bestows a ri ght on every citizen of Pakistan to enter or move fr eely throughout the country and to reside and settle in any part thereof.

[62] It is a settled proposit ion of law that the right to ente r in the country cannot be denied but a citizen can be restrained from going out of the country. Th e petitioner is a citizen of Pakistan and has a constitutional righ t to enter and rema in in th e country. 29. Above are the r easons of the Short Order dated 7.4.2004, whereb y above petitions were dismissed as under: - “During the course of arguments, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner is ready to face the case s registered against him.

[63] He also stated that the petitioner will not mind even if he is arrested at the airport. 2. For reasons to be recorded later on, both these petition are dismissed with an observation that the petitioner may come back from abroad subject to the la w of the country.” C.J. J. J. Islamabad 7.4.2004 APPROVED FOR REPORTING