Case No: C.P.20/2009
Case Title: The Bank of Punjab v. Haris Steel Industries, etc.
Subject: Transfer of cases
Judge: MR. JUSTICE GHULAM RABBANI
Judgment Date: 01-09-2010
Upload Date: 01-09-2010
Citations: PLD 2010 SC 1109
SC Citations: 2010 SCP 11
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/ConstitutionPetitionNo39of2009.pdf

[1] ORDER Pursuant to the preceding order , following persons representing their Organisations , have entered appearance: - Waris Malik ( Respondent No.3 in Const. P.  ) (CNIC No. 35202 -9233959 -7) Irfan Ahmad Sheikh ( Respondent No.3 in Const. P. No. ) Muhammad Munir Sh. ( CNIC No. 35202 -4541788 -1) Noman Arif ( Respondent No.2 in Const.

[2] P. No. ) (CNIC No. 35200 -1424207 -7) Muhammad Zia -ul-Haq ( Respondent No.1 in Const. P. No. ) (35201 -1578154 -7) Haroon Aziz ( Respondent No. 1 in Const. P. No. ) (CNIC No. 35202 -9878627 -5) Aziz-ul-Hameed ( Respondent No.1 in Const. P. No. ) (CNIC No. 35202 -2418938 -5) Shoaib Qureshi ( Respondent No.1 in Co nst.

[3] P. ) (CNIC No. 35202 -8482330 -1) whereas neither Ali Ijaz, Sh. Muhammad Afzal, Noman Iqbal, Asad Ashraf , Suhail Tufail, Muhammad Suhail and Hamesh Khan have attended the Court nor any one is present on behalf of Hamza Rice Mills, respondent N o.7 in Const. Petition No.. It is reported by Muhammad Munir Sheikh that his brother, Sh.

[4] Muhammad Afzal and nephew, Haris Afzal are out of country being in United Kingdom. He is directed to produce their complete addresses alongwith Passport num bers. As far as remaining persons who have not attended the Court, their service shall be effected through the Deputy Registrar, Lahore. Notices be sent to him today by fax.

[5] He shall be free to involve any agency for effecting service so that they may at tend the Court on the next date of hearing. 2. Learned counsel for Hamesh Khan stated that he has obtained a concise statement duly signed by his client and notarized in U.S.A. It is pertinent to mention that despite directions of this Court, Hamesh Khan is not in attendance.

[6] The learned counsel may obtain his complete a ddress by tomorrow, inasmuch as , if he is not willing to avail the facility of protection of this Court provided to him vide order dated 29.6.2009, then process as envisaged under the la w, shall be issued for ensuring his attendance. 3. Kh. Haris Ahmad , learned counsel for the petitioner stated that no serious efforts have been made by the individual respondents or the respondent -Companies and they are trying to prolong the matter on o ne or the other pretext.

[7] He further stated that the Bank of Punjab got evaluat ion of its collateral security from M/S Iqbal A. Nanji & Company whereas Mr. Uzair Karamat Bhindari, learned counsel for some of the respondents stated 3 that the said evaluati on is not proper as according to evaluation of their own evaluators, the valuation of the property was much higher, therefore, on account of this reason negotiation between the parties could not be finalized. 4.

[8] We have seen the evaluation reports prepare d by the evaluators engaged by the respondents but without hearing them and understanding the basis on which t hey have evaluated the property, it would not be possible to accept the said valuation . Therefore, all the evaluators engaged by the respondents as well as M/S Iqbal A.

[9] Nanj i & Company are required to attend the Court on the next date of hearing. 5. Learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the controversy between the parties cannot be settled unless a true picture in respect of the st atus and the names of the persons who mortgaged the properties with the Bank with particulars , is not brought before the Court .

[10] According to him , some of the properties are situated on the border of Pakistan and India but at the time of taking loans this was not pointed out . Moreover, preparing fictitious Identity Cards in certain cases, the same were mortgaged by playing fraud with the Bank and indirectly 900 0 deposito rs who had deposited their money had factually been deprived of their money. 6.

[11] There being two sets of evaluators showing their respective evaluation s, as noted hereinabove, to satisfy ou rselves as to the status of th e properties and to obtain the names of the mortgag ees with full particulars, etc, we direct the Chief Secretary , Government of the Punjab to depute a competent officer from the Board of Revenue, Punjab not below the rank of Secretary of the Board , who shall adopt measures by visiting the lands/plots/sites personally and having gone through the records, ownership of t he properties, the names of the mortgagees with their particulars and Identity Cards, etc. and value prevalent in the market on the basis of Aust Bai, submit a comprehensive report which must reach the Court on the next date of hearing. 7.

[12] The responden ts who have not deposited the copies of the ir Identity Cards are required to do so before the next date of hearing. The Secretary Interior, Government of Pakistan as well as the Director General, F.I.A. may also depute two officers from their respective d epartments, who shall assist Mr.

[13] Shah Khawar, learned Deputy Attorney General and Dr. Danishwar Malik, Prosecutor General, N.A.B. for the purpose of providing information to them to procure the details of the persons whose attendance is to be procured from outside the country by adopting the relevant processes provided by law and those officers shall be available to assist the Court as to whether there is an extradition treaty between Pakistan and the United States of America, where presently Hamesh Kh an is 4 residing as well as with the United Kingdom, where Sh.

[14] Muhammad Afzal and his son Haris Afzal are statedly residing . The learned Deputy Attorney General will also examine if in such like situation s, when a person is disobeying the order of the Co urt would it be possible for the Government to cancel his Passport/other immigration documents on the basis whereof he has traveled abroad.

[15] It is reported that Hamesh Kahn left Pakistan through Peshawar despite the fact that his name was on the exit con trol list . We were informed that an investigation in this behalf is going on against the concerned officers. We would appreciate if the Director General, F.I.A. expedite s the action against them and also submit s a report on the next date of hearing. 8.

[16] Let this case be adjourned to 16.7.2009. The respondents, present in Court, shall continue appearing on each date of he aring unless otherwise directed. In the meanwhile, no harassment will be caused to them nor will any agency arrest them without Court o rders . 9. As the listed petitions cannot be disposed of without perusal of the record of the litigation pending before the Islamabad High Court, the Registrar of the said Court is directed transmit all the files of the cases, details of which shall be furnished by Khawaja Haris Ahmad to the Registrar of this Court during the course of the day.