Case No: C.P.1/2012
Case Title: Mst. Rohaifa v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary M/o Defence, etc
Subject: Miscelleneous
Judge: Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed
Judgment Date: 03-12-2013
Upload Date: 10-12-2013
Citations: PLD 2014 SC 174
SC Citations: 2013 SCP 147
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/const.p.1_%202012_etc.pdf

[1] ORDER IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ. – In response to order dated 30.01.2012, four detenus , namely, CONST.P  DT 10.02.2012 2 Dr. Niaz Ahmad, Abdul Maajid, Gulroze and Abdul Basit, reportedly admitted in the Lady Reading Hospita l, Peshawar (LRH) and Mazharul Haq, Shafiqur Rahman and Muhammad Shafique who are stated to be in the Internment Centre, Para Chinar have not been produced.

[2] Raja Muhammad Irshad, Sr. ASC had filed caveat on behalf of respondents No. 2 to 4. Before Juma prayer, case was taken up and he was made to understand that the Court order has to be complied with, with a further direction to him to make arrangement for their production before the Court. 2. When the case was taken up again , in view of its importance, at about 5.00 p.m., Raja Muhammad Irshad, learned Sr.

[3] ASC was not in attendance. The learned Attorney General for Pakistan, on our query, stated that at about 3.30 p.m., the former had informed him that the detenus who were in the Internment Centre , Para Chinar could not be brought as they had to cover a long distance while travelling from Para Chinar to Islamabad and at the same time, he informed that the detenus reportedly admitted in the LRH shall also be brought along with them.

[4] The learned Advocate Ge neral, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa is also present in Court. He was asked to explain that if the statement/information so recorded by them is accepted to be correct, it means that the detenus are in the custody of the Civil Administration because the persons who ar e in the Internment Centre, Para Chinar cannot be kept over there without the sanction of the competent authority/Governor, Khyber CONST.P  DT 10.02.2012 3 Pakhtunkhwa .

[5] Similarly, the detenus in the LRH are in a civil hospital, therefore, the Civil Administration ought to have inquired about their detention over there. Imtiaz Ahmad DSP City, Peshawar appeared and stated that he had no knowledge of the admission/deten tion of the four above named persons in the LRH. Be that as it may, on the last date of hearing, Raja Muhammad Irshad , Sr.

[6] ASC, who appeared on behalf of respondents No. 2 to 4 along with Ch. Muhammad Yaqoob, Joint Secretary and Commander Muhammad Hussain Shahbaz, Director Legal, Ministry of Defence was directed to produce all the seven persons before the Court. Although reply has been filed, but compliance has not been made.

[7] Under the circumstances, we are of the opinion that it is the responsibility of respondents No. 2 to 4 , namely, Director General, ISI, Director General, MI and Judge Advocate General, JAG Branch , to comply with the order of the Court in letter and spirit. Non -appearance of their counsel also suggests that reluctance is being shown from producing the detenus before the Court.

[8] This fact may not be out of context that initially when this case came up bef ore this Court on 06.01.2011 statement was made by Raja Muhammad Irshad on behalf of respondents No. 2 to 4 that the said persons ha d been taken from Adiala Jail for the purpose of trial under the Army Act . And reportedly, four persons, namely, Muhammad Amir, Tahseenullah, Said Arab and Abdul Saboor, in the meantime , had passed away.

[9] According to the learned counsel, dead bodies of two out of above four persons were handed over CONST.P  DT 10.02.2012 4 in the LRH while the third, namely, Said Arab was alive at that time, but he sub sequen tly died in the LRH and his dead body was also handed over to his heirs. As far as the dead body of Abdul Saboor is concerned, his dead body was found lying in an ambulance parked near Haji Camp, Peshawar.

[10] Therefore, production of left over persons n amed above before the Court was all the more necessary. In the circumstances, we direct respondents No. 2 to 4 , severally and jointly , as well as the Chief Secretary, Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa , who is the head of the Civil Administration over there to ensure production of these persons before this Court in safe custody without fail on 13.02.2012. 3.

[11] The instant order be communicated to respondents No. 2 to 4 through Secretary Defence. Copy of the process shall be collected by the representatives o f the Ministry of Defence mentioned above from the office during the course of the day and after effecting service upon respondents No. 2 to 4 they shall send compliance report to the Registrar. 4.

[12] In the meanwhile, notice be also issued to the Governor , Khyber Pakhtunkhwa through the Chief Secretary to apprise this Court as to whether in terms of Article 14 of the Actions (in Aid of Civil Power ) Regulation, 2011 as to whether the Oversight Board ha d been constituted, and if so, he should procure report from the Board as to whether they had visited the persons who were allegedly detained in the Internment Centre CONST.P  DT 10.02.2012 5 for the purpose of ascertaining their condition.

[13] The Chief Secretary shall appear in person. IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ . KHILJI ARI F HUSSAIN , J. TARIQ PARVEZ, J. Islamabad, the 10 February , 2012