Case No: Crl.P.L.A.48-P/2015
Case Title: Muhammad Daud and others v. Syed Abid Ali and another
Subject: Against Acquittal/Sessions
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed
Judgment Date: 12-07-2021
Upload Date: 16-07-2021
Citations: 2021 SCMR 1470
SC Citations: 2021 SCP 215
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.p._48_p_2015.pdf

[1] judgment dated 19.02.2015 passed by the Peshawar High Court Mingo ra Bench (Dar -ul-Qaza) Swat in Crl. Appeal No.) Muhammad Daud and others …Petitioner s Versus Syed Abid Ali and another ..Respondent s For the Petitioner(s) : Mr. Naveed Akhtar, ASC For the Respondent (s): Mr. Muhammad Inaam Yousfzai, Addl.

[2] A.G. K.P. Date of hearing: 12.7.2021 ORDER Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J-. A shoot out within the precincts of Jehanzaib College Saidu Sharif Swat resulted into multiple casualties , each youthful ; Muhammad Fawad (PW-6), Zafar Ali (PW-9) survived the life of fire, however, Muhammad Musa and Hashim Khan succumbed to their wounds .

[3] The petitioner along with Nasir, since proclaimed offender, was arrayed as the culprits in the crime report lodged by Muhammad Daud Khan (PW -18); during the trial, h e was joined by other witnesses. Prosecution failed at the first tier as a learned Additional Sessions Judge acquitted the respondent from the charge vide judgment dated 14.6.2014 ; appeal against ac quittal met with no better fate vide impugned judgment dat ed 19.2.2015 , vires whereof, are being assailed on the ground that both the courts , in concurrence , ran into grievous error by relying upon reticent deposition by the injured witnesses , notwithstanding, that other eye witnesses present at the spot categori cally named the respondent as well as the proclaimed offender , both spearheading the assault in a unison inside an educational premises .

[4] Forensic report confirming use of two different weapons with three empties wedding one weapon left at the spot , was a c ircumstance that heavily reflected upon respondent’s culpability, next argued the learned counsel. 2 2. We have examined the record to find that though both the injured witnesses categorically confirmed receipt of fire shot injuries at the stated venue and point of time in the backdrop , suggested in the crime report, however, given their positions in the opposite direction in the crowded canteen , they had not visually seen the respondents, taking on the deceased , a shortcoming seemingly made up by other wit nesses present at the spot.

[5] In the totality of circumstances and having regard to the absconsion of one of the assailants, we consider it expedient to grant leave so as to reappraise entire evidence with a view to secure the ends of justice. Send for Abid Ali through bailable warrants in the sum of Rs.200,000/ - with one surety in the like, returnable to the Assistant Registrar of this Court, executable through Station House Officer concerned , within a fortnight .