Case No: Crl.P.L.A.235-L/2015
Case Title: Mehboob Hassan v. Akhtar Islam, etc
Subject: Against Acquittal/Anti-Terrorism Act
Judge: Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail
Judgment Date: 27-10-2023
Upload Date: 02-02-2024
Citations: 2024 SCMR 757
SC Citations: 2024 SCP 59
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.p._235_l_2015.pdf

[1] judgment of the Lahore High Court, Bahawalpur Bench, Bahawalpur dated 13.01.2015 passed in Crl. Appeal No. 4/ATA of 2011, Crl. Appeal No. 05/ATA of 2011 and Crl. Appeal No. 06/ATA of 2011) Mehboob Hassan …Petitioner Versus Akhtar Islam etc …Respondents For the Petitioner : Ch. Azeem Sarwar, ASC (Via video link Lahore ) For the State : Mirza Abid Majeed, DPG Date of Hearing: 27.10.2023 JUDGMENT Jamal Khan Mandokhail, J. - Brief background of the case is that the petitioner lodged an FIR on 13.07.2006 against unknown persons , under sections 365 -A, 201, 3 4 PPC and section 7 of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997, at Police Station City Haroonabad, District Bahaw alnagar, for the abduction of his nephew, Muhammad Farrukh Iqbal.

[2] Subsequently, the respondents were arrested in connection with some other case. It is the prosecution’s case that , during investigation whereof, the private respondents allegedly confessed before the investigating officer regarding their involvement in the present case. Consequently, they were subjected to identification parade in presence of a Magistrate , where the witnesses identified the respondents as the persons, who received the ransom amount.

[3] It is also alleged that during the interrogation, upon disclosure of Kamran (respondent No.4) and Muhammad Boota (respondent No.3) , an amount of Rs. 100,000/ - and Rs. 50,000/ - was recovered from their respective houses on 07.08.2008 and 21.08.2008 . On conclusion of trial, the respondents were convicted and sentenced .

[4] On an appeal, they Crl. P. No. 235 -L of 2015 2 were acquitted of the charge by the High Court through the impugned judgment, hence, this petition for leave to appeal. 2. Arguments heard and have perused the reco rd. The prosecution’s case rests upon the identification parade and recovery of the alleged amount from the houses of the stated respondents .

[5] The Magistrate who conducted the identification parade in jail, stated that five rows consisting of under -trial prisoners and the respondents were made. In each row, one of the respondents was made to sit. The witnesses were asked one by one to ident ify the accused. Consequently, they identified all the respondents in one go.

[6] Though the Magistrate managed to make five rows consisting of th e under -trial prisoners and each of the respondent s, but the fact remains that they all were present in the same premises under one roof. The manner in which the Magistrate managed to co nduct the identification parade leads us to a conclusion that it was a combined and joint identification parade .

[7] This Court in the case s of Gulfam1, Shafqat Mehmood2 and Mian Sohail Ahmed3 has held that joint identification parade is a nullity. Besides, the abductee saw the persons for the first time when he was abducted, whereas, the complainant witnessed those for the first time, who allege dly received the ransom amount from him.

[8] It is noteworthy that the persons who abducted the abductee and those who received the ransom amount were not known to the witnesses prior to the identification parade. It was, therefore, necessary for the witnesses to have had given some features of each of the respondents, with their specific role , during the investigation, before the identification parade, enabling the Magistrate to manage the person of identical features for the purpose of including them in identification parade as dummies.

[9] It is an admitted fact that the witnesses did not disclose any such fact in respect of the respondents . Moreover, in order to maintain secrecy, it was the responsibility of the concerned police to ensure that the accused should not witness by the witnesses while in police station lock -up or in police custody.

[10] The police was re quired to have taken every precaution to conceal the identity of the detainees before conducting the identification parade. All these 1 2017 SCMR 1189. 2 2011 SCMR 537. 3 2019 SCMR 956. Crl. P. No. 235 -L of 2015 3 precautions should not only be taken, but must have been proved to have been taken.

[11] There is nothing on the record to prov e that any step was taken by the police in this behalf. Before conducting the identification parade, the respondents had raised an objection before the Magistrate that the witnesses saw them in the lockup and their photographs were published in the newspap ers in connection with some other case .

[12] The prosecution did not deny the objection . The Magistrate was required to record the objection and to decide its fate, but he ignored the objection and instead , continued to complete the process of identification pa rade. The identification was conducted after a lap se of more than two years of the occurrence, ther efore, it is hard to believe th at the witnes ses could still have momentary glimpse of the respondents.

[13] Under such circumstances, the presumption would be tha t they were picked from amongst the other persons during that identification , because the witnesses had access to the police station and saw the respondents in the police lock -up and might have saw their pictures published in the newspapers before the identification parade .

[14] Evidence of such witnesses, identifying the respondents as accused, looses it efficacy. The respondents are mainly picked up in the identification parade, and the role attributed to them is not stated by the witnesses, the identifica tion parade in the circumstances was not in line with Article 22 of the Qanoon -e- Shahadat Order , 198 4, hence, is of no evidentiary value and cannot be relied upon.

[15] Reliance in this behalf can be placed on Nazir Ahmad4. 3. Besides, the prosecution has relie d upon the amount recovered after more than two years of the occurrence from the respective houses of Kamran and Muhammad Boota. It is unbelievable that someone would retain the crime amount for such a long time.

[16] Even otherwise, t he recovered currency notes admittedly did not contain any identification mark nor had the prosecution given any description or denomination thereof allegedly delivered by the complainant to the respondents . It is a common practice that most of the people retain cash a mount in their houses, therefore, it is not safe to consider the recovered amount to be a part of the ransom amount .

[17] The prosecution has failed to prove that the recovered amount was actually a portion of 4 2011 SCMR 527. Crl. P. No. 235 -L of 2015 4 the ransom amount, allegedly paid by the complainan t to the alleged abductors , hence, such recovery cannot be believed or relied upon for the purpose of convicting the respondents. 4.

[18] Other than the identification parade and recovery of the amount, there is no other evidence to corroborate the contents of the FIR and statements of the complainant and his witnesses. The Trial Court while convicting the respondents has come to a wrong conclusion by mis -appreciating the evidence and material available on the record .

[19] The High Court after proper appraisal of th e record and scanning the evidence in its true perspective , has reached a correct conclusion by acquitting the respondents of the charge . After their acquittal, the respondents have earned a double presumption of innocence. To reverse the judgment of acqui ttal, reasonable grounds are required, which are lacking in this case.

[20] The learned counsel for the petitioner has failed to point out any illegality or irregularity in the impugned judgment , warranting interference . Even otherwise , it is a fundamental legal principle that only an aggrieved person can challenge a judgment or order of acquittal. In real sense, in the cases of abduction, the abductee (s) is an aggrieved person and has a right to challenge a judgment or order of acquittal.

[21] In the case in han d, the abductee was an aggrieved person, but he did not challenge the impugned judgment. Instead, the petition has been filed by the complainant, who has no locus standi in his capacity as a complainant to challenge the impugned judgment of acquittal. 5. We have observed in number of cases that accused are acquitted in genuine cases because of poor or colourable investigation; lack of ameliorating skills of investigating authorities; non -availability of modern equipments and techniques with investigating agencies ; lack of evidence or reluctance of witnesses to cooperate with the prosecution for multiple reasons , one of which is that there is no mechanism in vogue for their protection.

[22] Sometimes, in genuine cases , the accused are acquitt ed for the reason that the complainant conceals necessary facts or widens the net by involving person(s) having no nexus with the case, in order to pressurize the main culprit . In certain cases, the accused are acquitted by the courts without properly appr eciating the evidence and law in its true perspective.

[23] Similarly, in some Crl. P. No. 235 -L of 2015 5 cases, the accused are convicted by the Trial Courts, but subsequently, they are acquitted by the High Courts or by this Court because of lack of evidence. In any case, wrongful acqu ittal or wrongful conviction is a breach of law and an abuse of process of the Cour t. 6.

[24] The basic duty of the Judges is to protect the fundamental rights of every person, including a complainant and an accused, in all circumstances. They are under obligation to discharge their duties and perform their functions with open mind, without any influence or pressure , fear or favour, affection or ill -will, honestly, justly and to the best of their ability , by applying the Constitution and law in their true perspective, on the basis of facts and circumstances of each case.

[25] In doing so, t hey are required to get the assistance of lawyers , prosecutors and guidance from the judgments of this Court and the High Courts , in order to reach a correct conclusion . This will protect the fundamental rights of the people to a possible extent , will serve the interest of justice, and will also boost faith and confidence of people in our judicial system .

[26] We do not doubt the integrity and competence of any Judge . There might be multiple reasons for wrong decision , but there should be no excuse for a Judge in delivering a judgment contrary to the law and facts. In any case, t he Judges must be aware of their judicial powers and must exercise them to reach a correct conclus ion, in order to protect the f undamental rights of the people and to promote the interest of justice . 7.

[27] The Code of Criminal Procedure , 1898 (“Cr.P.C.”) provides a procedure for investigation of criminal cases and their trial. Section 173 of Cr.P.C . requires that the police must complete investigation and submit its report within a period of 14 days from the date of recording of an FIR. In most of the cases, the investigating officers submit reports with unjustified delay , which is one of the obstacles in early disposal of cases5.

[28] Similarly, non -observance of mandatory provisions of Cr.P.C. and relevant Rules by the investigating officer s, result into acquittal of real culprit s. Sometimes, false accusation is made against persons who in reality , are not involved in a case, but for no reason, they are subjected to prolong litigations.

[29] Because of the neglect of the investigating authorities, 5 2021 SCMR 1458 Crl. P. No. 235 -L of 2015 6 the real culprit is either kept from being punished for the offence actually committed or an innocent perso n is detained or even wrongly convicted by the courts. Such act of the investigating officers is in violation of the Constitution and law.

[30] In any case, it is against the fundamental rights of a person , which eventually creates a wrong perception and sends a negative message against the judiciary. 8. It is obligatory upon the Trial Court to ensure constitutional guarantee of life, liberty, fair trial and due process enshrined in Articles 9 and 10A of the Constitution.

[31] Section 265-D of Cr. P.C. provides that the Trial Court should consider all the available material , whereafter, if it is of the opinion that there is ground for proceeding with the trial of the accused, it shall frame in writing a charge against the accused. If no charge could be framed or if charge is framed , but there is no probability of the accused being convicted of the charge on the basis of the material available on the record , the Trial Court has power under section s 265-K and 249-A, of Cr.P.C. , as the case may be , to acqui t an accused at any stage of the case , either on its own motion or upon an application in this behalf filed by an accused after providing opportunity of hearing to all concern6.

[32] Such power is mandatory in nature , which must be exercised judiciously in orde r to prevent the abuse of process of law and frivolous and malicious litigation, which will also result into curtail ing the backlog. 9. Another issue which is being faced b y the litigant s is the inordinate and unreasonable delay in conclusion of criminal trials and appeals /petitions , without any substantial progress , which is a crucial challenge to the Administration of Criminal Justice System in our country .

[33] Such delay is antithetic to the foundational principles of liberty , fair tr ial and due process . Under such circumstances, it is the primary duty of the investigating agencies and every judge of the country to take in to account such fundamental right s of person s, whose case s are brought before them by strict adherence to law.

[34] The present case is a classic example, wherein, the respondents were arrested in the year 2008 , they were convicted by the Trial Court on 12.01.2011 and 6 Ammad Yousaf V. The State through Advocate General, Islamabad and another; 2023 SCP 314 , citation available on official website of SCP. Crl. P. No. 235 -L of 2015 7 remained in custody till 13.01.2015, when they were acquitted by the Appellate Court.

[35] Though the r espondents got acquittal , but they did not get justice in time. No one can justify the detention of the respondents , depriving them from their constitutional right of liberty and free movement for long seven years . In addition , they have faced the agony an d misery of a prolonged trial and unreasonable delay in conclusion of appeal , besides incurring expenditure .

[36] They remained uncompensated , because there is no mechanism for doing so. The famous legal maxim that justice delayed is justice denied , is often used when unjustified delay occurs in disposal of disputes. When the legal machinery fails to deliver justice within a reasonable time, it not only violates the constitutional mandate , but also leads to frustration .

[37] Thus, an inexpensive and timel y justice is a requirement of the Constitution, which must be observed by all stakeholders in all circumstances without any excuse. 10. There is no doubt that the prosecuting agencies and the courts are over -burdened because of increase in the number of cases as a result of population explosion and lack of basic facilities , necessary for early dispensation of justice, but still they are under constitutional and legal obligation s to conduct and conclude fair investigation and fair trial within a stipulated period to the possible extent, or in a reasonable period where there is no time limit provided by law for doing so .

[38] Within the prevailing system, it is difficult to achieve the desired results, but some improvement s could be made into the system by proper management in order to streamline the investigation and judicial proceedings . Such goal cannot be achieved without the cooperation of investigating agencies , complainant s, lawyers , prosecutors and all relevant persons/authorities.

[39] It is incumben t upon investigating officers, lawyers and prosecutors to follow the law and cooperate with courts so as to avoid unnecessary and unjustified delays in early disposal of the cases . Likewise, cooperation between investigating agencies and prosecutors/complainant s is essential in order to pursue the matter to ensure timely and fair conclusion of the cases. 11.

[40] To address the deficiencies in prosecution ’s cases, and to avoid unreasonable delays in the timely conclusion of criminal Crl. P. No. 235 -L of 2015 8 trials and appeals, it is an obligation of the State under Article 37(d) of the Constitution to ensure inexpensive and expeditious justice. In this behalf , the vacancies of judicial officers across the country must be filled in on merits, without any delay; to consi der increase in the number of judges , wherever it is so required ; to ensure upgradation of the investigation mechanism , introduction of modern techniques , equipments , devices and tools ; conducting regular and fruitful training courses for the investigating officials; ensuring independence of judiciary and the investigating agencies, providing basic facilities, friendly and workable atmosphere to the Courts, the investigating agencies, ensuring safety and protection of the judicial officers, investigating officials and witnesses.

[41] The Government must also take steps to curb the trend of registration of false and frivolous litigation ; and to ensure that the frivolous litigants are not let off scot-free for such acts. By taking all such measures, certain laws are required to be amended or certain legislation is required, which may be considered by the Government and the Parliament/Assemblies.

[42] Till the time, such a policy is devised or necessary enactments are made, the courts must exercise their p owers already granted by available laws to do complete justice and to discourage frivolous and malicious litigation . Thus, in view of above, leave is refused and the petition is dismissed. The amount recovered from the respondents No. 3 and 4 should be re turned to them.