Case No: Crl.P.L.A.245/2023
Case Title: Saeed Ullah S/o Jumma Khan and others v. The State through A.G. Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and another
Subject: Bail After Arrest
Judge: Mr. Justice Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi
Judgment Date: 04-05-2023
Upload Date: 01-06-2023
Citations: 2023 SCMR 1397
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 155
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.p._245_2023.pdf

[1] judgment dated 20.02.2023 passed by the Peshawar High Court, D .I.Khan in Crl. MBC No. 123 -D/2022 ) Saeed Ullah, Yar Muhammad, Inayat Ullah … Petitioner s Versus The State and another … Respondents For the Petitioner s: Mr. Aftab Alam Yasir, ASC For the State: Mr. Sultan Mazhar Sher Khan, Addl. A.G.

[2] For the Complainant: Raja Muhammad Farooq, ASC Date of Hearing: 04.05.2023 ORDER SAYYED MAZAHAR ALI AKBAR NAQVI, J. - Through the instant petition under Article 185(3) of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, the petitioner s have assailed the judgment dated 20.02.2023 passed by the learned Single Judge of the learned Peshawar High Court, D.I.

[3] Khan Bench , with a prayer to grant post -arrest bail in case registered vide FIR No. 300 dated 17.11.2021 under Sections  PPC at Police Sta tion SNK, District D.I. Khan , in the interest of safe administration of criminal justice. 2. Briefly stated the allegation against the petitioner s is that they along with co -accused while armed with Kalashnikovs launched a murderous assault on the complai nant party and due to the firing made by them , the complainant sustained injur ies on his body .

[4] After their arrest, the petitioners applied for post -arrest bail before the learned Trial Court and succeeded in getting the relief sought for. Being aggrieved, the complainant filed cancellation of bail petition before the learned High Criminal Petition No.  3 2 Court, which has been allowed vide impugned judgment .

[5] Hence, this petition seeking leave to appeal . 3. At the very outset, it has been argued by learned counsel for the petitione rs that the petitioner s have been falsely roped in this case against the actual facts and circumstances. Contends that the allegations leveled against the petitioner s are false, frivolous, baseless, concocted and the prosecution story is not worthy of cred it.

[6] Contends that in the crime report no specific role has been attributed to the petitioner s and the same is general in nature, therefore, the case of the petitioner s is one of further inquiry. Contends that injur ies sustained by the complainant are on no n- vital part s of the body, as such, the provision of Section 324 PPC is not attracted in the case.

[7] Contends that the learned High Court while recalling the bail granted to the petitioners has not followed the guidelines issued by this Court for the safe ad ministration of criminal justice, therefore, the same may be set at naught and the petitioner s may be released on bail. 4. On the other hand, learned Law Officer assisted by learned counsel for the complainant opposed the petition by contending that the petitioner s have specifically been nominated in the crime report with a specific role of firing at the complainant , therefore, they do not deserve any leniency from this Court 5.

[8] We have heard learned counsel for the parties at some length and have perus ed the available record with their able assistance. 6. As per the contents of the crime report, the allegation against the petitioners is that they along with co -accused while armed with Kalashnikovs launched a murderous assault on the complainant party and due to the firing made by them, the complainant sustained injuries on his body.

[9] There is no denial to this fact that it’s a case of promptly lodged FIR as the matter was reported to the Police within an hour of the occurrence. However, we have noted th at only a general role has been ascribed to the petitioners and no details have been given as to which petitioner fired at which part of the body of the complainant.

[10] The Criminal Petition No.  3 3 complainant received injuries on the non -vital parts of the body . A bare perusal of th e medico legal report reveals that at the one hand the medical officer declared the injuries as “simple ” and on the other hand he held the same to be “grievous ”. On court query, learned Law Officer admitted that none of the injuries exposed the bone.

[11] It is now well settled principle of law that if two views are possible from the evidence adduced in the case then the view favourable to the accused is to be adopted. Reliance is placed on Saghir Ahmed Vs. State (2023 SCMR 241) and Sahib Ullah Vs. The State (2022 SCMR 1806). As stated above, the complainant sustained injuries on non -vital parts of the body whereas m ore than 37 empties have been recovered from the place of occurrence, which prima facie shows that the accused had no intention to kill the complaina nt despite having ample opportunity to do so.

[12] In this view of the matter, the question whether Section 324 PPC would be applicable in the case or not would be determined by the learned Trial Court after recording of evidence. In the case reported as Samiul lah Vs. Laiq Zada (2020 SCMR 1115), this Court has framed following seven guidelines for the purpose of cancellation of bail: - “i) If the bail granting order is patently illegal, erroneous, factually incorrect and has resulted into miscarriage of ju stice. ii) That the accused has misused the concession of bail in any manner. iii) That accused has tried to hamper prosecution evidence by persuading/pressurizing prosecution witnesses. iv) That there is likelihood of absconsion of the accused b eyond the jurisdiction of court. v) That the accused has attempted to interfere with the smooth course of investigation. vi) That accused misused his liberty while indulging into similar offence. vii) That some fresh facts and material has been col lected during the course of investigation which tends to establish guilt of the accused.” 7.

[13] On our specific query , learned counsel for the complainant admitted that none of the above -said principles have been violated , which could be made basis to cance l the bail granted to the petitioners by the Criminal Petition No.  3 4 learned Trial Court . In the Samiullah supra case this Court in categorical terms has held that where material available on the record does not support a finding of misuse of concession of bail by the accused in any manner, the court can decline cancellation of bail even if it is satisfied that the bail granting order passed by the court below is not sustainable in the eye of law.

[14] However, we are of the view that the learned High Court did not take into considerat ion the above aspect of the matter. Even this Court has shown magnanimity where although the order granting bail to the accused by the court was found to be perverse but showed reluctan ce to recall the order. Reliance is placed on Shahid Arshad Vs.

[15] Muhamma d Naqi Butt (1976 SCMR 360). This court in a number of cases has held that liberty of a person is a precious right , which has been guaranteed under the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, and the same cannot be taken away merely on bald and vague allegations . Taking into consideration all the facts and circumstances stated above, we are of the view that the case of the petitioner s squarely fall s within the ambit of Section 497(2) Cr.P.C. entitling for further inquiry into their guilt. 8.

[16] For what has been discussed above, we convert this petition into appeal, allow it and set aside the impugned judgment . The petitioner s are admitted to bail subject to their furnishing bail bonds in the sum of Rs.200,000/ - each with one surety each in the l ike amount to the satisfaction of learned Trial Court.