Case No: Crl.M.A.1379/2017
Case Title: Mureed Sultan and another v. The State thr. Prosecutor General, Punjab and another
Subject: Compromise
Judge: MR. JUSTICE QAZI FAEZ ISA
Judgment Date: N/A
Upload Date: 06-10-2017
Citations: 2018 SCMR 756
SC Citations: 2017 SCP 93
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Crl.M.A._1379_2017_Additional_Note.pdf

[1] judgment is delivered by the Court . The judgment has two compon ents, conviction, which means he is guilty, and the sentence, which is the punishment awarded to him . If the legal heirs of the deceased compound the offence it does not mean that the person who was convicted for murder was no t Crl. M.

[2] A. No.  3 guilty of it, which would b e the case if, as a consequence of allowing the composition, he is “acquitted”. Subsection (6) of section 345 also avoids creating such a fiction as it provides that the “ composition of an offence … shall have the effect of an acquittal ”, which means that the punishment (sentence) part of the judgment is brought to an end ; neither this subsection states, nor it could, that the convict is “acquitted of the charge”.

[3] The verdict of guilt ( the conviction part of the judgment) that the Trial Court had recorded c ould only have been undone by the High C ourt, failing which by this Court; it can not be undone by the legal heirs of the murdered person s. 5. The law permits the legal heirs of a murdered person to compound the offence with the convict , with or without re ceiving badal -i-sulh/d iyat (section s 310 and 323 PPC).

[4] If the legal heirs compound the offence they elect not to seek retribution or the enforcement of the sentence . The very premise of compounding the offence is the acknowledgment of guilt by the accused who is then forgiven by the legal heirs; the affidavits filed by the legal heirs clearly also state that they have forgiven the petitioners .

[5] In the application too the petitioners simply seek their release, and not their acquittal. 6. Section 338 -F of th e PPC stipulates that in the interpretation and application of Chapter XVI (“Offences Affecting the Human Body”) “ and in respect of matters ancillary or akin thereto, the Court shall be guided by the Injunctions of Islam as laid down in the Holy Qur’an and Sunnah ”.

[6] The aforesaid interpretation of subsection (6) of section 345 is in conformity with a number of verses of the Holy Qur’an: surah Al -Baqarah (2) verses 178 -9, surah Al -Maidah (5) Crl. M. A. No.  4 verse 45, surah Al -Isra (17) verse 33 and surah Ash -Shura (42) verse 40. In these verses Almighty Allah our Merciful Creator suggests that forgiveness and reconciliation is preferable to revenge or retaliation.

[7] A person can only be forgiven if he is guilty . The cited verses neither state nor imply that the finding of guilt , which is recorded by a court of law, is effaced. 7. Some may question the significance of this entire discussion, and enquire , if a court has accepted the application under section 345 of the Code and the convict has been released from jail what differe nce would his acquittal make.

[8] There are grave repercussions. A man who has committed murder but is “acquitted” merely because the legal heirs of the murdered person compound the offence, would enable the murderer, for instance , to honestly declare on a job application that he is not and has never been a convict; he could thus be eligible to apply for government employment, be employed as a teacher, be inducted into the Armed Forces, enter the judicial service or even be appointed as a judge of the superior courts.

[9] There is then the religious aspect to the discussion. The person who has committed the sin of murder if he professes his guilt or is convicted in this world , and serves out his sentence or is released as a consequence of the legal heirs forgiving him, may be spared the agony of punishment in the Hereafter. 8.

[10] Therefore, I agree with the conclusion reached by my learned brother that leave be granted and the application under section 345 of the Code for compounding the offences be accepted and the petitioners/convicts be released from jail forthwith, unless required in any other criminal case . Consequently , the appeal be allowed to such extent.

[11] However, I do not agree that upon Crl. M. A. No.  5 accept ance of the application it follows that they be “acquitted of the c harge” or that this outcome is mandated by section 345 of the Code . Convicted murderers can only be acquitted by a court of competent jurisdiction and after application of mind by judges.

[12] Acquittal can not be secured, or granted for that matter, whilst accepting an application under section 345 of the Code. Criminal Petition No. 1616 -L of 2016 : This petition was filed by the complainant seeking enhancement of the sentence s of the convicts from imprisonment for life to death. However, since the heirs of th e deceased have entered into the aforesaid compromise, which has been accepted by this Court, the petition is dismissed.

[13] Criminal Miscellaneous Application No. 508 of 2017 : This application has sought the suspension of the sentences awarded to the petiti oners/convicts, however, in view of the aforesaid compromise, which has been accepted by this Court , the application has become infructuous and is accordingly dismissed.