Case No: Crl.A.188/2023
Case Title: Muhammad Ashraf v. The State
Subject: Death Sentence/Sessions
Judge: Mr. Justice Malik Shahzad Ahmad Khan
Judgment Date: 07-04-2025
Upload Date: 24-04-2025
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2025 SCP 128
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.a._188_2023.pdf

[1] JUDGMENT MALIK SHAHZAD AHMAD KHAN, J.- Muhammad Ashraf, appellant was tried by the learned Sessions Judge, Matiari, • pursuant to a case registered vide FIR No.207 dated 28.12.2012 under Section 302 PPC, at Police Station Hala. The learned Trial Court vide its judgment dated 27.07.2015, convicted the appellant under Section 302(b) PPC and sentenced him to death.

[2] He was also directed to pay compensation amounting to Rs.200,000/- to the . legal heirs of the deceased as envisaged under section 544-A Cr.P.C. The appeal filed by the appellant was dismissed by the ' /.'• learned High Court vide impugned judgment dated 01.07.2021. •. Arguments heard. Record perused. 2.

[3] As per contents of the FIR, on 27.12.2012, a mazda pickup ' 3. brought to the shop- of the complainant party for repairing . • • wasFor the Complainant: Date of Hearing:PRESENT: MR. JUSTICE ATHAR MINALLAH MR. JUSTICE IRFAN SAAD AT KHAN - MR. JUSTICE MALIK SHAHZAD AHMAD KHANIN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN (APPELLATE JURISDICTION) Criminal Appeal No. 188 of 2023 ■■■ ' (On appeal against the judgment dated 01.07.2021 passed by the High Court of Sindh, ■ Circuit Court, Hyderabad in Criminal Appeal No.D- & Confirmation Case No.D- ) ...Respondent(s) ‘ • Ms.

[4] Aisha Tasneem, ASC work but its work could not be completed till 4.00 a.m on the next ■ '. ■ Muhammad Ashraf . iCr, Appeal No,  • 2 (PW-1), Naseer Muhammad Khair (PW-1), Naseer Muhammad (PW-2) and Aamir Ali (PW-3), woke tip. the r'- •• The motive behind the occurrence was that Moula Bakhsh FIR of this case. 4, such there is delay(deceased), used to work at the workshop of the appellant as a. • . . mechanic but about 1% months prior to the occurrence, he left the ■. ■ job from the workshop of the appellant and opened his ownmazda pickup, whereas Moula Bakhsh (deceased), slept inside his •• • shop.

[5] On 28.12.2012, at 7.00 a.m, Khair Muhammad complainant.' ; '■ morning, Khair Muhammad complainant ■ Muhammad (PW-2) and Aamir Ali (PW-3), therefore, slept in the ■ on hearing the sound of opening of the shutter of their shop and they also heard the caries coming from inside the shop, whereupon, .. > ■ . ■ " ;■ .'.y s' they reached at the spot.

[6] They saw that Muhammad Ashraf (appellant), was inflicting hatchet blows on the face of brother of' . complainant namely Moula Bakhsh (deceased), who ■ succumbed to the injuries at the spot. The appellant while wieldixig his hatchet, as well as, extending threats to the complainant and.. . • ’ the PWs fled away from the spot. . workshop adjacent to .the workshop of the appellant and due to this grudge, the appellant committed the occurrence, hence the We have noted that as per contents of the FIR, the ■ occurrence took place on 28.12.2012 at 7.00 a.m but the FIR was . lodged on the said day at 12.00 (noon) and as ■ of about five (05) hours in lodging the FIR.

[7] The distance between ■ the police station and the place of occurrence was only two , furlongs. The complainant has categorically stated in the contents ■ ..of the FIR that Moula Bakhsh succumbed to. the injuries at.the.- spot, hence it cannot be held that the abovementioned delay in ,Cr. Appeal No.  lodging the FIR was consumed for the medical treatment of.

[8] Moula ’• /' occurrence, he informed his relatives namely Irshad, .Ali Dost and a.m but even then the FIR was not lodged till 12.00 (noon). All the .. .abovementioned facts show . that FIR . ..reported as “Shaukat Hussain v. The State through PG Punjab and • anothef ’ (2024 SCMR 929) and “Khial Muhammad v.

[9] The Stat^ (2024 SCMR 1490). The. occurrence took place inside the shop of Mula Bakhsh 5. (deceased) and the same took place in the month of December i.e., . 28.12.2012 was 7.12 a.m. The prosecution eye-witnesses in order. . to justify their presence at the odd hours of early morning in the ■party for the repair, work and all the abovementioned three eye- ,Muhammad Rafique through telephone about the incident, who .. •• reached at the spot at 8.15 a.m.

[10] He further stated that the police .• was also informed after arrival of his relatives at the place of ' ‘ ■ . occurrence and the police reached at the spot at about 9.15 or 9.30 ' ■. on 28.12.2012, at 7.00 a.m. According to sunrise/sunset calendar • of District Matiari of Sindh province, the time of sunrise on ■ month of December at the spot had stated that on the previous night a mazda pickup was brought to the shop of the complainant .••delay in lodging the FIR has created doubt regarding the ' . truthfulness of the prosecution stoiy as observed in the cases . 'consultation/deliberation and there was no plausible explanation. for the gross delay in lodged the FIR.

[11] The abovementioned gross 'was . lodged after • witnesses namely Khair Muhammad complainant (PW-1), Naseer slept..;, in - ■ the ■ ,Bakhsh (deceased), in order to save his life. The complainant has further , conceded during his cross-examination . that after the . ' Muhammad. (PW-2) and Aamir Ali .(PW-3), ■ 4 abovementioned mazda pickup on the night of occurrence.

[12] During z of occurrence. We are, therefore, of the view that the prosecution pickup was neither taken into possession vide any recovery memo • prosecution eye-witnesses in order to determine that as to whether It is further noteworthy that the conduct of the prosecution • 6.by the Investigating Officer nor the same was. produced before the ’ ■ . ' . ..learned , trial Court at the time of recording of statements of the ■could not. give any valid reason for presence of the abovementioned ■ .• eye-witnesses at the spot at the relevant time. • ' - • • * It is further noteworthy that the above-mentioned mazda... his cross-examination, the abovementioned witnesses stated that. ’• . they slept on the night of occurrence in a mazda pickup in sitting ' . position on the front seat.

[13] It is not understandable that as to why. it had 2 or 3 front seats or. not justifying the reason of presence of the eye-witnesses at the spot at the relevant time.eye-witnesses have also not given any valid reason for staying inside the abovenientioned pickup on the night of occurrence ■..' instead of going to their respective houses for sleeping on the night.. the above-mentioned witnesses slept in sitting position on the front . seat of the abovementioned vehicle and as to why they did mot." ' sleep inside the shop where Moula Bakhsh (deceased) was also Z sleeping and where the occurrence took place.

[14] The abovementioned ' eye-witnesses was highly un-natural. According to the prosecution ■ Case, the complainant party was comprising of three male adult '.Cr. Appeal No.  f ■■■ . ■ . Z ■ ■ ■■ persons i.e., Khair Muhammad complainant (PW-1), Naseer; Muhammad (PW-2) and Aamir Ali (PW-3), whereas the appellant was alone at the time of occurrence.

[15] The appellant was not armed . with any formidable firearm weapon and he was carrying a hatchet .Ct. Appeal No.  5 occurrence nor they tried to apprehend him after the occurrence. Hussain (PW-4), 10.00 a.m,at the,,relevant time. Khair Muhammad complainant (PW-l),:was real brother of Moula Bakhsh (deceased), whereas the remaining The' abovementioned un-natural conduct of the prosecution eye- ' witnesses shows that in-fact they were not present at the spot at the relevant time, hence their evidence is not worthy of reliance as . observed in the judgments reported as “Liaouat AU v.

[16] The State ”eye-witnesses were also close relatives of the deceased. According to the postmortem report of Moula Bakhsh (deceased), there were total eight. (08) injuries on his body. The abovementioned , • . (2008 SCMR 95), ."Pathan v. The State' ’ (2015 S.CMR 315). and -Zafar v. The State and others (2018 SCMR 326). ■■ ■■ .7.

[17] We have further noted that there is conflict between the ■ ocular account and the medical evidence of the prosecution.,. : .. . According to the evidence of the prosecution eye-witnesses, the '• occurrence took place on 28.12.2012 at 7.00 a.m..Dr. Shafique conductedprosecution witnesses, who were closely related to. the deceased kept on standing like silent spectators nt the time of occurrence and they gave a free hand to the appellant to inflict, . the abovementibned injuries on the body of the deceased.

[18] As per site • .. plan the abovementioned eye-witnesses were present only at a distance of twenty-one (21) feet and twenty-six (26) feet, ..respectively from the accused at'the time'of occurrence 'but they ■■■■ neither tried to. save the deceased from the appellant at the time of . on 28.12.2012, at postmortem examination on the dead-body of the deceased.

[19] According to his opinion, the probable time that elapsed between • . . the injury and the death was instantaneous, whereas the time that • jCr. Appeal No.  ■ 6 ■■ ■ /elapsed between the death and the postmortem examination was. 9 . to 10 hours, which means that the occurrence took place bn 28.12.2012 at 12.00 (night) to 1.00 a.m and as such the medical • , evidence has contradicted the ocular account of the. prosecution. . ■ 8. .

[20] According to the prosecution case, the motive behind the. • occurrence was that Moula Bakhsh (deceased), was earlier employed at the workshop of Muhammad Ashraf (appellant). About IV^j months prior to the occurrence, the deceased left the workshop of the appellant and established his own workshop adjacent to the workshop of the appellant and due to this grudge, the appellant ■ committed 'the ' occurrence.

[21] In this respect, we have '. noted "that •. / about 1 14 months prior to the occurrence, the appellant .had.- ■ established his own workshop but no untoward incident took place during the abovementioned period. The complainant further .. ' alleged that as the appellant was unhappy on opening of the ' ■ ■ ? workshop by the.deceased adjacent to his workshop, therefore, the. appellant used to pressurize the deceased to close his shop but no specific time, date and place has been mentioned by ., any .. ,.. prosecution eye-witness that as to when and where the appellant .. pressurized the deceased to close his workshop.

[22] A vague motive was alleged by the prosecution, which has not been proved in this case. 9. Insofar as the recovery of blood stained hatchet and positive report of Chemical Examiner (Ex.No.l8/B), are concerned, without discussing the merits and demerits of these pieces of. the. prosecution evidence, it is noteworthy that as we have already ' disbelieved . the direct prosecution evidence, therefore, the conviction and sentence of the appellant cannot be maintain »Pr.

[23] Appeal No.  merely on the basis of alleged recovery of hatchet and positive FSLf) 1427), ‘Muhammad Afzal alias Abdullah and others, vs The State Sd/—-J ihtza:to this irresistible conclusion that the prosecution has failed to prove its case against the appellant beyond the shadow of doubt. It is by now well settled that if there is a single circumstance, which creates doubt in the prosecution case then the same is sufficient to ■ acquit the accused, whereas the instant case is replete with ‘ . number of circumstances, which have created serious doubts in., the prosecution story.

[24] Consequently, this appeal is allowed and the . impugned judgment is set aside. The appellant is acquitted of the Sd/—“J Sd/—Jand others j (2009 SCMR 436), ‘Abdul Mateen vs Sahib Khan and others ’ (PLD 2006 Supreme Court 538) and ‘Nek Muhammad and another vs The State ’ (PLD 1995 Supreme Court 516). 10.

[25] Keeping in view all the above-mentioned facts, we have come.. report. Reference in this context may be made to the judgments . reported as “Dr. Israr-ul-Haa vi Muhammad Fayiiaz ” (2007 SCMR . charge while, giving him the benefit of doubt. IJe shall be, released - from the jail forthwith unless required to be detainec^in any other case.■ Islamabad, the 07th of April, 2025 ^^«'t*^PProved For Reporting