Case No: Crl.P.L.A.888/2015
Case Title: Naseem Akhtar v. The State
Subject: Bail After Arrest
Judge: MR. JUSTICE DOST MUHAMMAD KHAN
Judgment Date: 27-01-2016
Upload Date: 17-03-2016
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2016 SCP 52
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Crl.P._888_2015.pdf

[1] judgment dated 20.10.2015 passed by the Lahore High Court, Rawalpindi Bench in Crl.Misc. No.1787 -B/2015) Naseem Akhtar …Petitioner Versus The State ..Respondent For the petitioner: Mr. S.M. Ayub Bokhari, ASC Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR For the respond ent: Raja Inaam Amin Minhas, Spl. Prosecutor, ANF Date of hearing: 27.1.2016 ORDER Dost Muhammad Khan, J. — After arguing the case at length, the learned counsel for the petitioner stated that if the Jail Authorities are directed to extend all required facilities to the suckling baby and her mother (the accused pet itioner) during confinement/detention and the Trial Court is directed to conclude the trial within a month, then he will not press this petition. 2.

[2] We have perceived from the fax massage of the Superintendent Jail, Rawalpindi that the petitioner is a s uckling baby of the age of one year and six months and depends on breast feeding. The Superintendant Central Jail, Rawalpindi is directed to ensure that the baby shall not suffer due to un -nutrition and all required standard facilities be provided to the b aby and her mother, which is required in such cases, while the Trial Court is directed to conclude the trial within one month, after receiving copy of this order .

[3] If the prosecution or the defense delays in the conclusion of the trial, the Trial Court may resort Crl.P. 2 to take appropriate action by imposing action and may adopt any coercive measure to ensure the conclusion of the trial. 3. If, in case, the trial is not concluded within one month and the delay in the conclusion of the trial is not attributable to the petitioner or any person, acting on her behalf then, fresh bail petition be considered favourable to her , by the Trial Court.

[4] With these observations, this petition is disposed of. Judge Judge Islamabad, the 27th January, 2016 Nisar / -‘