Case No: Crl.P.L.A.989/2021
Case Title: Ijaz Ahmad S/o Meyaz Khan and another v. The State thr. A.A.G. Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and another
Subject: Bail After Arrest
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed
Judgment Date: 29-09-2021
Upload Date: 01-10-2021
Citations: NA
SC Citations: 2021 SCP 277
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.p._989_2021.pdf

[1] judgment dated 2.7.2021 passed by the Peshawar Hi gh Court Peshawar in Cr. Misc. (B.A.) No.422 -M/2021) Ejaz Ahmad and another …Petitioner (s) VERSUS The State and another …Respondent (s) For the Petitioner (s): Mian Abdul Rauf, ASC For th e Respondent(s): Mr. Shumail Aziz, Addl. A.G. KP with Ziarat, I.O.

[2] Date of Hearing: 29.09.2021 O R D E R Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J.- Mst. Tasleem Bibi is blamed by the complainant, no other than her father, to have married with Ejaz Ahm ed, co-accused during the subsistence of her first marriage with one Noorullah ; both of them are behind the bars , lastly denied bail by a learned Judge -in-Chamber of the Peshawar High Court , Mingora Bench Swat, vide impugned order dated 2.7.2021 .

[3] Mian A bdul Rauf, ASC contends that Mst. Tasleem Bibi vehemently denies her alleged nuptial bond with Noorullah PW and had competently married with Ejaz Ahmed co -accused of her free will and volition by exercising discretion vesting in her both under the divine a s well as municipal law ; he further contends that the edifice of first marriage is resting upon an oral Nikah and in the absence of any judicial declaration jactitating the alleged marriage, it would be inexpedient to detain the couple, Crl.

[4] Petition No.  particularly when i t is serving no useful purpose . The learned Law Officer has contested the plea. 2. Heard. Record perused. 3. Be that as it may, without touching upon the merits of the plea raised before us, having regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, we would prefer to direct that the trial be concluded within a period of three months ; it shall be held in jail premises while enabling the accused to arrange their representation through a counsel of choice, in the event of incapacity to arrange a la wyer, the Presiding Officer shall provide them a counsel at State expense so as to positively conclude the trial within the stipulated time frame .

[5] Disposed of. JUDGE JUDGE JUDGE ISLAMABAD 29th September , 2021 Ghulam Raza /* “Not approved for Reporting”