Case No: Crl.A.154-L/2017
Case Title: Muhammad Yaqoob v. The State
Subject: Death Sentence/Anti-Terrorism Act
Judge: MR. JUSTICE QAZI MUHAMMAD AMIN AHMED
Judgment Date: N/A
Upload Date: 18-06-2019
Citations: PLD 2019 SC 580
SC Citations: 2019 SCP 139
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/Crl.A._154_L_2017.pdf

[1] judgment dated 10.2.2015 passed by the Lahore High Court, Lahore in Criminal Appeal No. 0 and CSR No. 26-T/2010 ) Muhammad Yaqoob …Appellant(s) VERSUS The State …Respondent(s) For the Appellant(s) : Mr. Saqib Akram Gondal , ASC For the State : Ch. M. Mustafa, Deputy Prosecutor General Date of Hearing : 30.05.2019 JUDGMENT Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J.- Gohar Zaman , Muhammad Afzal, Muhammad Ashraf, Babar, Zulfiqar Ali, Shiraz Ahmed, Asad Abbas, Muhammad Suleman, Muhammad Bashir , Arshad Bhatti, Haji Mushtaq and Muhammad Amjad, accused in a case of homicide , appeared before a learned Additional Sessions Judge within the precincts of District Courts , Gujrawnwala on 11-7-2009 ; posted for recording of evidence, the case was, however, adjourned for 17-7-2009 and it was soon thereafter, inside the court -room, the appellant alongside Muhammad Mushtaq, Haji Muhammad Siddique, Qaisar Munir with two unknown persons , differently armed, emerged at the scene ; they resorted to firing ; the appellant, cited as a witness in the said case, with a .30 caliber pistol, fired upon Gohar Zaman and Arshad Bhatti followed by Muhammad Siddique who targeted Muhammad Ashraf , PW-14 while Muhammad Mushtaq and Qaisar Munir fired upon Muhammad Bashir , given up PW, and Muhammad Afzal, PW-12, respectively ; they were joined by the unknown assailants; according to the crime report, lodged by Z eeshan Ilyas , PW-13, one Gogi was also shot during the occurrence .

[2] The assailants took Criminal Appeal No. 154-L of 201 7 2 to the heels except the appellant , apprehended at the spot and handed over to the police with two .30 caliber pistols, one found forensically wedded with three casings, secured during spot inspection . As the investigation progressed, Qaiser Munir and Haji Muhammad Siddique were let off; Muhammad Musht aq, co-accused is still away from law .

[3] Prosecution is clueless about the unknown accused till date. The appellant alone was indicted before an Anti Terrorism Court; he was returned a guilty verdict with penalty of death on two counts , upheld by a learned Division Bench of Lahore High Court vide impugned judgment dated 10.02.2015 vires whereof are being assailed through leave of the Court. 2.

[4] Prosecution case , predominantly, is founded on common ground s; these include, enmity long raging between the two fa ctions , hearing of the case, appearance of the deceased and the appellant being amongst the witnesses, on the fateful day, at the venue, a court -room as well as appellant’s arrest therefrom .

[5] Though with some reticence , nonetheless, the appellant has not denied his presence during the episode albeit with the story of a most uncalled for provocation offered by the deceased . Three casings secured by the Investigating Officer though incommensurate with the number of alleged fire shots , nonetheless, were opined to have been fired from the weapon carried by the appellant .

[6] Totality of circumstances does not space any hypothesis other than appellant’s guilt ; he has rightly been convicted on the charge of homicide , however, quantum of sentence , notwithst anding the venue, warrants reconsideration . It is prosecution’s own case that the appellant attended the Court to re cord his statement as a witness; the case was adjourned without recording of evidence and it is subsequent thereto that as many as six accused started firing upon the deceased and the PWs; two from amongst them have since been exonerated, never tried even through private complaint ; Muhammad Mushtaq alongwith two unknown accomplices is still away from law; appellant’s acquittal from the ch arge of attempted homicide has not been challenged.

[7] Appellant himself sustained injuries receipt whereof is denied by the prosecution witnesses . These circumstances cloud moments immediately preceding the Criminal Appeal No. 154-L of 201 7 3 occurrence into mystery , particularly when in the g iven background, the appellant ha d no exclusive motive , targeted upon the deceased .

[8] In this backdrop, as a cumulative impact, alteration of death penalty into imprisonment for life would not be unconscionable in circumstances . Consequently, penalty of death on both counts is altered into imprisonment for life; sentences shall run concurrently with benefit of Section 382-B of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.

[9] Though the aftermaths far from being benign, nonetheless, having no nexus with the situations and effects thereof, contemplated by Section 6 of the Anti Terrorism Act, 1997 , appellant’s conviction under section 7(a) thereof is not inconsonance with the law declared by this Court in the cases reported as Amjad Ali and others Vs.

[10] The State (PLD 2017 SC 661 ) and Farooq Ahmad Vs. The State and another ( PLJ 2017 SC 408 ) and is , therefore , set aside. With the above modification, Criminal Appeal is dismissed. JUDGE JUDGE Lahore, the 30th of May, 2019 Azmat Ali /* JUDGE