Case No: Crl.A.366/2010
Case Title: Muhammad Hanif v. The State
Subject: Death Sentence/Narcotic Substance Case
Judge: MR. JUSTICE QAZI MUHAMMAD AMIN AHMED
Judgment Date: 16-10-2019
Upload Date: 18-10-2019
Citations: 2019 SCMR 2033
SC Citations: 2019 SCP 226
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.a._366_2010.pdf

[1] judgment dated 18.3.2010 passed by Lahore High Court Rawalpindi Bench Rawalpindi in Crl. Appeal No.335 of 2003 ) Muhammad Hanif ….Appellant Versus The State … Respondent For the Appellant Mr. M. Shahid Kamal Khan, ASC Mian Muhammad Zafar Iqbal, ASC For the State :Mr. Tariq Mehmood Jeh angiri , Advocate General Islamabad with Muhammad Hussain Lasi, DSP/I.O.

[2] Date of Hearing :16.10.2019. JUDGMENT QAZI MUHAMMAD AMIN AHMED , J.- On a tip off, a contingent of Police Station Tarnol, District Islamabad, intercepted a truck bearing Registration No. JT/7808 with a vehicle bearing No. AA/7504 being the payload ; upon search of the cargo, secret cavities , concealing a huge cache of charas , packed in different bundles with total weight of 3 mound and 12 kilograms were detected; the stuff was secured vide inventory ; appellant is owner of the vehicle being shifted in the truck ; samples, taken from each bundle, confirmed narcotic character of the contraband .

[3] Upon indictment, the appellant claimed trial , pursuant whereto , prosecution produced four witnesses to drive home the charge . The appellant confronted prosecution evidence with the following plea: - “I had been serving as driver of the said Toyota Pickup. On 24.5.2002, the owner of the said Toyota vehicle, loaded it in truck No.JT/7808 and asked me to take the same to Lahore to be delivered to his brother in law; who is running an auto workshop there.

[4] As the owner wanted to sell it, after Criminal Appeal No. 2 reconstitution of the engine, which was seized, however, on my way to Lahore, the Police stopped the tr uck, and as already mentioned, took the same to the Police Station. I was told by the police at the Police Station that charas was recovered from the secret cavities of the Toyota Pickup.

[5] I was not at all aware of any incriminating substance, concealed any where in the Toyota Pickup, as alleged. The police, to whom I had disclosed all this, traced the owner and, instead of challaning him, let him off after bargaining with him , and challaned me being a poor driver. I have been made a scapegoat.

[6] The owner also did not care to pursue my case.” The learned Trial Court was not much impressed by appellant’s plea and instead preferred the prosecution evidence to return a finding of guilt with ultimate penalty of death , affirmed by the High Court vide impugned judgment dated 8.3.2010 vires whereof are being assailed by leave of the Court on the ground s that samples were not taken from each piece of the contraband and thus the appellant cannot be saddled with the responsibility for the whole lot , nor being an unsuspe cting employee on the payroll could be attributed conscious knowledge, blamed upon the alleged employer. 2.

[7] We have gone through the statements of the witnesses constituting an uninterrupted chain of facts ranging from seizure to forensic analysis of the contraband ; the witnesses are in a comfortable unison on all the salient details regarding interception of the huge consignment as well as steps taken subsequent thereto .

[8] Since the contraband comprising various pieces, quite a few in number, was packed in different bundles , separation of samples for chemical analysis, taken from each bundle, is found by us as exercise sufficient to constitute forensic proof; argument that sample s were required from each piece, packed in each bundle, is entirely beside the mark .

[9] It would be naively unrealistic to assume that random sampling left space for any doubt about the wholesome narcotic character of the contraband , too huge to be manipulated for concealment in an expensive luxury vehicle. Exoneration of driver and cle aner of the truck by the police , in retrospect , lends credence to the case set up by the prosecution , even otherwise structured upon flawless and immaculate evidence .

[10] Defence suggested to the witnesses in the box and position taken in support thereof are far less than convincing to override the overwhelming evidence , inexorably pointed upon the appellant ; plea of substitution , Criminal Appeal No. 3 clamored without entering the witness box to blame the employer , having abandoned the appellant out in the cold does not hold much w ater as well.

[11] View concurrently taken on appellant’s culpability is not open to any legitimate exception. However, q uantum of sentence suggested to be exacted from the appellant by the Courts below warrants a serious reconsideration . Huge quantity of cach e, notwithstanding , given toxic lethality of the contraband being on lower side coupled with the position taken by the appellant , though rejected , nonetheless, calls for exercise of caution in awarding irreversible penalty of death , therefore imprisonment for life, in circumstances, is viewed by us as a conscionable wage for the crime .

[12] Consequently, penalty of death is altered into imprisonment for life to be commuted with benefit under Section 382 -B of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 ; amount of fine a nd consequence of default are kept intact . Criminal Appeal is partly allowed in t he above terms. JUDGE JUDGE Islamabad, the 16th October , 2019 JUDGE Ghulam Raza /*