Case No: Crl.P.L.A.1581/2021
Case Title: Waqas Nazir S/o Muhammad Nazir and others v. The State thr. P.G. Punjab and others
Subject: Bail After Arrest
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed
Judgment Date: 21-02-2022
Upload Date: 28-02-2022
Citations: 2022 SCMR 955
SC Citations: 2022 SCP 82
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/crl.p._1581_2021.pdf

[1] order dated 13.12.2021 passed by the Lahore High Court, Rawalpindi Bench in Crl. A. No.2126 -B and 2045 -/2021) Waqas Nazir and others …Petitioner (s) Versus The State & another …Res pondent (s) For the Petitioner (s): Mr. Shaukat Aziz Siddiqi , ASC Pir Muhammad Masood Chishti, A SC Ch. M. Sasfdar Bhatti, ASC Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR For the State : Mr.

[2] Muhammad Jaffar, Addl. P.G. Punjab with Muhammad Saqlain Naeem, DSP, Zeeshan Haider, SHO and M. Imran Khalid, ASI For the Respondent(s): M alik Waheed Anjum, ASC Date of Hearing 21.02.2022. ORDER Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. :- Proceedings in a pre - arrest bail petition , pending before a learned Additional Sessions Judge at Rawalpindi , turned the District Court Complex into a bat tle field between the two rival factions of property developers , at 8:15 a.m. on 27.8.2021 ; both groups , each in number s unusually large , took on each other and in the process ransacked benches at the first floor as well as nameplates of the Judges and use d them as weapons of assault on their opponents ; they also dismantled plastic pipes of air conditioners; the court staff attempted to intervene only to face their wrath and then confined themselves behind the safety of close doors ; the Judges also retired after suspending the judicial work ; a panic gripped the premises amid multiple fire shots; a police contingent detached at the court complex intervened and apprehended many of Crl.

[3] P.  2 them at the spot. A criminal case was registered wherein both sides were arrayed side by side ; present petitioners belong to one of them and seek bail after denial by a learned Judge -in-Chamber vide impugned order dated 13.12.2021 , leave to appeal wherefrom is prayed for on the grounds that all the offences , based upon general allegat ions, are scheduled as bailable and that mischief of section 7 of the Anti Terrorism Act, 1997 is not attracted to the facts and circumstances of the case as the only injury sustained by one of the Advocates is designated as Shajjah -i-Khafifa h within the contemplation of section 337 A(i) of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 .

[4] Continuous detention , by now exceeding six months i n judicial lock up, is serving no useful purpose , a circumstance to be thoughtfully viewed by the Court, concluded the learned counsel. The learned Law Officer has defended the view taken by the High Court , in its discretion, being well within the remit of law . 2.

[5] Heard. Record perused. 3. Pendency of an ad -interim pre arrest bail in a case of homicide before a learned Additional Sessions Judge on the eventful day is a common ground and so is assembly of a large number of supporters of each side in the court premises for purpose no other than to flex their muscles .

[6] Recovery memos confirm seizure of crime empties as well as two vehicles carrying offensive weapon s with munitions right from inside the court premises . Damaged nameplates, broken benches and other installations removed during the occurrenc e are also part of the inventory. We entertain no manner of doubt that it was beginning of a day in District Courts Rawalpindi far from usual , disruptive and awe-inspiring, for which both sides , bracing each other in a large number of cases, cannot conveniently shield themselves behind a bald denial .

[7] District/Trial Courts constitute a most impo rtant tier of our judicial system; here parties brace each other face to face at close blank with the Judge and advocates within physical reaches ; these temples of justice , by necessary implication s, are required to be most guarded by law ; it is essential that all those who man the first rung of judicial ladder attend their pursuits with the satisfaction of being safe and secure ; it is equally important that even the mightiest cannot dare to contemplate a transgression without a backlash sanctioned by law Crl.

[8] P.  3 and, thus, we find the High Court wise and conscionable in its discretion to disallow the motions . We do not consider it expedient to comment upon the argument relating to the suggested non -applicability of penal provisions invoked by the prosecution , a business to be best settled by the trial Court on the strength of material/ evidence before it , uninfluenced by the issue specific observation s recorded hereinabove.

[9] Even otherwise, the Supreme Court seldom interfere s with exercise of discretion in bail matters, that too, in cases of denials , manifestly untenable , not the one in hand . Petition fails. Leave declined. Judge Judge Judge Islamabad, the 21st February , 2022 Azmat /-