Case No: H.R.C.4925-G/2014
Case Title: Press Clipping of "Daily News" Dated 25-02-2014, regarding supplying cancer-diagnostic injections allegedly contaminated with undesirable radionuclides
Subject: Miscelleneous
Judge: MR. JUSTICE TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, HCJ
Judgment Date: 04-03-2014
Upload Date: 03-04-2014
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2014 SCP 28
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/hrc_4925-g_2014.pdf

[1] ORDER TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, CJ .- Suo moto notice was taken on a new s item published in Daily News dated 25.2.2014 to the effect that the Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology (PINSTECH) has been supplying cancer diagnostic injections allegedly contaminated with undesirable radionuclides that could cause can cer instead of diagnosing it and despite a direction for an enquiry, no action had been taken.

[2] Pursuant to the notice issued, the Director General PINSTECH constituted a committee to investigate into the allegations leveled and submit a report. It would be pertinent to refer to the summary of the findings of the said inquiry, which is as under: - “i. The committee studied in depth the quality procedures / SOP, visited relevant production facilities and testing Labs, interviewed relevant scientists / technici ans as well as went through the record of inspection / acceptance / rejection. ii.

[3] The following quality acceptance tiers are functioning at PINSTECH. a. The Quality Control Group under Incharge Production. b. Health Physics Laboratories and Quality Assurance Group under DG PINSTECH: - H.R.C. NO. 4925 -G OF 2014 2 The Inquiry Committee thoroughly checked the QC and QA record of all the molybdenum -99 batches produced at PINSTECH and found it in order as per SOP. iii.

[4] Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory Authority (PNRA), being an independ ent regularity authority and licensor, also conducts random testing which was verified by the Committee. iv. The production facility was installed / commissioned by renowned German scientists and highly qualified Pakistani scientists. The Mo -99 is thus pr oduced according to the international quality standards. v.

[5] The feed -backs from various end -user hospitals have been received and confirmed that product is rechecked and qualified by the user. The disqualified product (if any) is not used. vi. The commi ttee has satisfied itself that standard operating procedures for qualification and certifications were not violated.

[6] No evidence could be found of any pressure whatsoever from the high ups on the analysts or technicians to alter the quality control results .” 2. In view of the report submitted, it seems the news item was not based on a correct appreciation of the relevant facts. In any case , it has served a purpose i.e. on intervention of the Court, the PINSTECH got the allegations inquired into and the f indings referred to above len d credibility to the exercise undertaken by the PINSTECH.

[7] In the afore -referred circumstances, the proceedings have fructified and are being disposed of accordingly. CHIEF JUSTICE JUDGE JUDGE Islamabad, the 3rd of April , 2014 Not Approved For Reporting Khurram