Case No: J.P.514/2016
Case Title: Muhammad Jahangir v. The State
Subject: Life Imprisonment/Sessions
Judge: Mr. Justice Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi
Judgment Date: 06-05-2024
Upload Date: 16-08-2024
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2024 SCP 266
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/j.p._514_2016.pdf

[1] JUDGMENT Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi, J.- Jail Petition No» Muhammad Jahangir (petitioner) faced trial before convicted and sentenced to death and was directed to pay an amount of 100,000/- as compensation to the legal heirs of the deceased under Section 544-A of Cr.P.C. 2.Muhammad Jahangir Muhammad Lateef : Mr.

[2] Irfan Zia, Deputy Prosecutor General, Punjab Being aggrieved by the aforementioned conviction and appeal before the Lahore HighSessions Judge, Bahawalnagar in case F.I.R No. , dated 23.09.2011, under Section 302 PPC, registered at Police StationPRESENT: Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail Mr. Justice Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi Ms.

[3] Justice Musarrat HilaliIN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN (Appellate Jurisdiction)>1^ 5^^ sentence, the petitioner preferred an: Ch. Abdul Ghaffar, ASC (in JP ) (Through video link Lahore) Nemo (in Crl.P. lOll-L/16) Takhat Mahal. At the conclusion of the trial, the petitioner wasJail Petition No. & Crl.

[4] P. lOll-L/2016 (Against the judgment dated 22.06.2016 passed by the Lahore High Court, Bahawlpur Bench passed in Crl. Appeal No.313-J/2012J J. P. 514 of 2016 -2-1 Court, Bahawalpur Bench, and the murder reference was also sent to the High Court for confirmation negative keeping the amount of compensation intact.

[5] The benefit of Judgment) of the Lahore High Court, the petitioner has preferred this petition seeking acquittal whereas the complainant filed the criminal petition for leave to appeal seeking enhancement of the sentence. 3. that the Muhammad Lateef (complainant) through his statement Exh PC, reported the matter to the police while stating the facts that his sister Mst.

[6] Siddiqan Bibi was married to Allah Ditta son of Ghulam Muhammad about  years back who was blessed Muhammad Sharif and Muhammad Nasir PWs, had gone to meet Mst. Siddiqan Bibi at her house in village Qasimka. Muhammad Jehangir (accused) who is brother of Allah Ditta, the brother-in-law of the complainant, was also present in the house of Allah Ditta.

[7] He demanded Rs.2000/- from Allah Ditta whereupon the sister of the complainant responded him that they had accused left the house while saying that he was proceeding towards his in-laws' house. The complainant was present at his sister ’s house. During noon, the sister of the complainant went to the field of Falik Sher for fetching grass for cattle who did notSection 382-B Cr.P.C was also extended to the petitioner.

[8] Being dissatisfied with the judgment dated 22.06.2016 (Impugnedimprisonment for life and answered the Murder Reference inor otherwise. The High Court The facts of the case, as gathered from the FIR, are whereupon altercation took place between Muhammad Jehangir (accused) and Mst. Siddiqan Bibi. On the next day, at 09:00 amon 22.09.2011, the complainant alongwith with three sons; no moneywhile converting the death sentence of the petitioner to J.

[9] P. 514 of 2016 -3- return for a long time, upon this the complainant, Muhammad Sharif, and Muhammad Nasir PWs went to find whereabouts of 4. Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the material contradictions in the statements of the witnesses and that the prosecution has miserably failed to prove its case against the petitioner. 5.

[10] On the other hand, the learned Law Officer, assisted by the learned counsel for the complainant, has opposed the the relatives thus there is no chance of misidentification; that the ocular account is corroborated by medical evidence and the prosecution has proved its case beyond any shadow of doubt. Lastly, he prays for the enhancement of punishment. 6.

[11] Heard the learned counsel for the parties as well as the learned Law Officer at length, and scanned the material available on the record with their able assistance.impugned judgment is suffering from misreading or non-reading of evidence;running away. Mst. Siddiqan Bibi died at the spot due to the injuries sustained by her.away.

[12] They tried to apprehend him but the accused took the advantage of the crops and succeeded inMst. Siddiqan Bibi and pressing her throat. On observing the complainant and PWs, he ranher. When they reached in the land of Falik Sher, they heard the cries of Mst. Siddiqan Bibi. They rushed towards the said spot and saw that Muhammad Jehangir accused was sitting on the chest of contentions advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner by submitting that it is a daylight occurrence and parties inter se area concocted story has been established and the petitioner has been roped in the case with mala fide intention; that there are J.

[13] P. 514 of 2016 -4- 7. It is the case of the prosecution that the petitioner namely Muhammad Jehangir murdered Mst. Siddiqan Bibi on the grudge that she refused to pay him the stipulated amount when he asked her. The parties inter se are close relatives inasmuch as the accused is the brother of the complainant ’s brother-in-law and the accused has murdered his brother ’s wife. 8.

[14] In order to prove the charge against the petitioner, the prosecution has primarily relied upon the evidence of two eyewitnesses the complainant (PW-5) and Muhammad Sharif (PW- 6) who are real brothers of the deceased, the motive, medical evidence, and recovery. It is pertinent to mention here that Muhammad Nasir PW who was also an eyewitness was given up by the prosecution being unnecessary. 9.

[15] As far as motive is concerned, the learned trial court through its judgment has conceded that the prosecution has failed to prove the motive in the case at hand. Paragraph 10 of the said judgment is reproduced below for the sake of convenience: (emphasis added)V deem it appropriate to discuss the motive as well as the recovery evidence at the first instance in the instant case.

[16] As per the assertion of the prosecution witnesses, in presence of PW-5 and PW-6 Muhammad Jehangir accused demanded an amount of Rs.2000/- from his brother Allah Ditta, the husband of the deceased. The deceased asked him that they have no money and on such refusal an altercation took place between accused and the deceased.

[17] The further narration of the PWs was that after the altercation they all stayed in the house of deceased that night and on the next day, firstly accused left the house and at noon time the deceased went away in order to fetch fodder for the cattle. If the accused had the said motive in his mind, there was hardly any chance of his staying in the house of deceased that night.

[18] Prima-facie it reflects that even if some amount was demanded by the accused and refused by the deceased, it was not that serious issue between them. There are certain contradictions in the deposition of PW-5 & PW-6 with regard to alleged altercation between the accused and the deceased as according to the contents of the complaint they remained silent spectators to the said altercation.

[19] In view o f the above discussion, I am o f the considered opinion that orosectiticn failed to establish the motive". J. P. 514 of 2016-5- 10. recovery of the deceased ’s ear-rings is concerned, it was not proved by the prosecution during the trial, and the learned trial Court disbelieved it in paragraph 11 of its judgment as mentioned below: 11.

[20] If the motive part and recovery of the crime weapon are testimonies of two eye-witnesses, and medical evidence. 12. The defence has seriously challenged the presence of both PWs at both places i.e., the deceased ’s house and the place of sisters spontaneously. However, staying overnight typically occurs only in the context of a family event.

[21] In this instance, the PWs were unable to provide a justification for their overnight stay at their sister's complainant (PW-5) replied to this query as mentioned herein; A similar answer was rendered by PW-6 who is an eye­ witness of the incident. 13. Furthermore, we have examined the second aspect in occurrence.

[22] It is alleged that they saw the accused committing the murder of their sister by pressing her throat with her dupatta. Itof stay and whether there was plausible justification was given by the PWs in this regard. The “There was no specific family function at the house of my sister Siddiqan Bibi for which we visited her house on 22.09.2011 ”.any family function.

[23] However, nooccurrence. Beginning with PWs visit to their sister's home, it is“According to the prosecution version the ear rings of deceased were removed by the accused, resulting into injuries of her ears. The complaint is silent about the said feature. The said fact earlier came on record through the supplementary statement of the complainant and witnesses.

[24] No much weight can be extended to the same as by that time the post-mortem proceedings had been completed ”.As far as this regard, whether the PWs were present at the place ofhouse. They were posed specific questions regarding their purposeexcluded, the entire case of the prosecution rests on the common in our society for brothers to visit their J.

[25] P. 514 of 2016-6- from a distance of  karams. At the time of occurrence, there front of three persons and that too in cotton crops having  feet height. 14. are also missing in the FIR and supplementary statement. It shows that PWs improved their version later on. The injuries on the deceased ’s ear were not mentioned by the PWs.

[26] The specific question was put to the complainant during cross-examination w;hether he mentioned the ear-rings before the police. He answered in the following manner: witness makes dishonest improvements in his statement then it loses the significance in the eyes of law. i In Muhammad Mansha case, 2 it has been ruled as follows:is hard to believe that one accused can succeed in fleeing away inwere cotton crops not less than the height of  feet.

[27] Generally, it 1 Sardar Bibi and another v. Munir Ahmad and others (2017 SCMR 344), Amir Zaman v. Mahboob and others (1985 SCMR 685), Akhtar Ali and others v. The State (2008 SCMR 6), Khalid Javed and another v. The State (2003 SCMR 1419), Mohammad Shafiqe Ahmad v. The State (PLD 1981 SC 472), Syed Saeed Mohammad Shah and another v.

[28] The State (1993 SCMR 550) and Mohammad Saleem v. Mohammad Azam (2011 SCMR 474). 2 Muhammad Mansha vs the State, 2018 SCMR 772The material facts relating to the place of occurrence “I had stated before the police that the gold ear rings of Siddiqan Bibi were missing and she was bleeding through her ears.

[29] Volunterred that the police did not mention the said fact in my statement Exh PC. on 26.09.2011 I came to know that the fact of missing gold earrings of Siddiqan Bibi deceased was not mentioned in my statement Exh PC when I read the same ”. “Once the Court comes to the conclusion that the eye­ witnesses had made dishonest improvements in their statements then it is not safe to place reliance on their statements.

[30] It is also settled by this Court that whenever a witness made dishonest improvement in his version in order to bring his case in line with the medical evidence or in order to strengthen the prosecution case then his testimony is not worthy of credence. The witnesses in this case have also made dishonest improvement in order to bring the case in line with the medical evidence (as observed by the learned High Court), in that eventuality conviction was not sustainable on the testimony of the said witnesses. ”This Court has held in a number of cases that where awere added through theis claimed by the three PWs that they witnessed the occurrence J.

[31] P. 514 of 2016 -7- 15. Apart from dishonest improvements in the version of unexplainable delay of 3 hours despite the fact that the distance of the police station from the place of occurrence was 5 km. The time reported at 08:30 pm. The complainant had a bike that he used to go to the police station.

[32] This delay has not been encountered through plausible explanation by the prosecution. 16. Dr. Sadia Habib (PW-7) furnished the medical evidence version Muhammad Iqbal constable took the dead body of the deceased to the hospital, the last worn clothes were handed over to him by the doctor and he produced those articles before the I.O.

[33] As per the post-mortem report, it was Mushtaq Muhammad constable who received the dead body and other articles from the doctor. It casts doubt on the post-mortem report and raises the question that who actually received the aforementioned articles once the post-mortem was done. 17. Thus, the minute scrutiny of the evidence of PW-5 and PW-6, the eye-witnesses, makes their presence at the spot highly doubtful. 18.

[34] Qua medical evidence, it corroborates the version of the complainant as stated in the FIR but the same is ofno medical evidence by its nature and character cannot recognize a culprit in case of an un-witnessed incident. The eyewitness account relied upon by the prosecution is unreliable and untrustworthy as observed above, therefore, the petitioner ’s conviction cannot sustain on the basis of medical evidence alonecomplainant, perusal of record reveals that FIR was lodged after an assistance in this case asof occurrence is around 05::30 pm and the matter is in the present case.

[35] According to the prosecution J. P. 514 of 2016-8- 19. This Court in the case of Hashim Oasim and another versus. The State .3 has enunciated that: - 20. consistent approach that the presumption of innocence remains with the accused till such time the prosecution on the evidence of the principles, which seeks to ensure that no innocent person is convicted. 21. prosecution to adduce evidence that convincingly demonstrates the prudent person might have before making a decision. adequate to warrant acquittal, unless the court is fully convinced beyond reasonable doubt regarding the guilt of the accused, thorough and impartial examination of all available evidence. 22.

[36] We find that there are major contradictions in the prosecution ’s case that were overlooked by the courts below. We are constrained to hold that the prosecution has failed to prove its case beyond any reasonable doubt. 23. appeal and is allowed. The impugned judgment is set aside. The petitioner is acquitted of the charge.

[37] He be set at liberty if not required to be detained in any other case.Mere presumption of innocence associated with the accused isguilt of the accused to a prudent person. A reasonable doubt is asatisfies the Court beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused is hesitation aguilty.4 It is one following a 3(2017SCMR 986) * Muhammad Asghar alias Nannah and another v.

[38] State [2010 SCMR 1706] 5 Ibid para 5.,"The medical evidence is only confinnatory or of supporting nature and is never held to be corroboratory evidence, to identify the culprit. ” Serious doubts in the case of prosecution have been Consequently, this petition is converted into anoverlooked by the Courts below.

[39] This Court has maintained a Proof beyond areasonable doubt requires the *J. P. 514 of 2016-9- Criminal Petition No«1011-L/2016 24. is hereby dismissed. 25. Above are the reasons for our short order pronounced on even date. Judge V Judgea natural corollary this petition seeking enhancement of sentenceappeal and is allowed and he is acquitted of the charge therefore as Islamabad, the 6th May 2024 APPROVED FOR REPORTING Zafar, LC*Since petition of the accused is converted into an