Case No: S.M.C.4/2021
Case Title: Enforcement of Fundamental Rights with regard to independence of Press/Media v.
Subject: U/A 184(3)
Judge: Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa
Judgment Date: 20-08-2021
Upload Date: 20-08-2021
Citations: 2021 SCMR 1602
SC Citations: 2021 SCP 247
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/s.m.c._4_2021.pdf

[1] order dated 20.08.2021 in SMC No. And Suo Mot u Case No. Suo M otu action regarding highhandedness by FIA action pursuant to FIR No. and FIR No.  lodged at FIA Cyber Crime Wing, Lahore And Constitution Petitions No.,  and  Syed Ibn -e-Hussain and others (in Const. P. ) Press Association of the Supreme Court through its President Mian Aqeel Afzal, Islamabad and another (in Const.

[2] P. ) Farieha Aziz (in Const. P. ) …Petitioners Federation of Pakistan through its Ministry of Information, Islamabad and ot hers (in all cases) …Respondents For the Petitioner: Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed, ASC (through video link, Karachi) Mr. Absar Alam Mr. Matiullah Jan Mr. Asad Toor (in Const. P s. 4 &  1 and 4 of 2024 ) For PFUJ: Mr.

[3] Sh ah Khawar, ASC For the Petitioner: Mr. Haider Waheed, ASC (via video link, Karachi) Mr. Anis M. Shahzad, AOR Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR Raja Sher Bilal, In person Mr. Ibrar Ahmed, In person Mr. M. Asif, In person (in Const. P. ) Ms. Farieha Aziz, In person (in Const. P. ) For Federation: Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl.

[4] AGP For ICI Islamabad: Mr. Ayyaz Shoukat, AG, ISI a/w Syed Ali Nasir Rizvi, IGP, Islamabad Suo Mot u Case No., etc 2 Mr. Masood Bangash, SSP, Investigation Mr. Raza Muhammad, SI/IO Mr. Ghulam Murtaza, SI/IO For FIA: Mr. Waqar -ud-Din, Addl. DG (Ops.) FIA Cyber Crime For M/o Information & Broad casting : Mr.

[5] Abid Mehmood, Ch., S.O (Legal) Date of Hearing: 13.05.2024 ORDER Investigation reports with regard to the case s of three journalists, who were attacked/abducted, namely, Mr. Absar Alam, Mr. Matiullah Jan and Mr. Asad Ali Toor have been submitted by the learned Additional Attorney -General for Pakistan (‘ AAG’) through CMAs.

[6] No. 2490, 4042 and 3051 of 2024. 2. Re. Mr. Matiullah Jan : Learned Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed represents Mr. Matiullah Jan , who is also in attendance. They state that a proper investigation did not tak e place and the Police has moved to close the investigation without justification and without having explor ed all avenues of investigation. (1) It is pointed out by Mr.

[7] Matiullah Jan that when he was abducted on 21 July 2020 at about 11 am from in front of the Islamabad Model School for Girls ( Junior S ection), situated on Street No.40 , G 6-, Islamaba d he had thrown his mobile phone , 0345 -8555919 of which the service provide r is Telenor , inside the compound of the said school .

[8] The investigation officer states that the phone was not retrieved by the Police but by the abductors . We are surprised that the location of the said phone, on the said date and time , was not sought which may also have helped in tracing the said abductors. (2) Learned Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed further states that the video recording which was sent for forensic determination apparent ly did not Suo Mot u Case No., etc 3 reveal actionable information, such as the vehicle registration number s of the vehicles in which the abductors came and their f eatures .

[9] It is further stated that only a portion of the said video recording was sent for forensic determination. We direct that the entire video recording be sent to the Punjab Forensic Science Agency for their analysis and report. (3) Learned Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed states that no effort was made to obtain recordings from a number of sensitive buildings situated in the area and from the cameras of the Safe City Project.

[10] Mr. Matiullah Jan states that Street No. 40 , from where he was abduct ed is situated opposite the NAB office , and the said street had been cordoned off by the Police and there was also a Police picket , but requisite enquiries were not even made from the policem en who were deputed on duty there. (4) Mr.

[11] Matiullah Jan states that he was dropped off by the abductors after crossing the Fateh Jang Toll Plaza , where the National Highway Authority (‘NHA’) has th eir cameras installed, but this aspect , that is his drop off on 21 July 2020 at around 9 pm , was not investigated by checking the recordings from the NHA installed cameras, and this should be done now. 3.

[12] Re. Mr. Absar Alam : Learned AAG states that those who may be involved in the case are abroad and the Government/Police has completed the requisite procedure and sent notices to Interpol for their arrest . He further states that the Government will be pursuing the matter. 4. Re. Asad Ali Toor : The lea rned AAG states that sketches of the persons who had intruded into his residence and manhandled him have been prepared.

[13] Suo Mot u Case No., etc 4 (1) Mr. Toor is present and says that the sketch of the person on page 88 is a fair resemblance but the sketch prepared on page 87 is not. Therefore, a fresh sketch of the perpetrator whose sketch is on page 87 be prepared afresh with the help of Mr. Toor . Mr. Toor also points out that there were three perpetrators but the sketch of the third was not prepared .

[14] The Police with Mr. Toor’ s help should sketch the features of the third intruder immediately. (2) Mr. Toor states that during the incident one of the perpetrators received a phone call , probably between 10.50 to 11 pm. If proper Geo - fencing was done the particulars of the phone of the perpetrator who had received the call and that of the phone used to call him could have been ascertain ed.

[15] We expect that the needful will be done now. (3) Mr. Toor states that his two cell phones , 0333 -5119547 , service provide r Ufone , and 0300 -9772445 , service provide r Mobilink , were taken away by the perpetrators . These could have been traced through IMEI tracking , but, u nfortunately , this too the investigators failed to do , and should be done now (4) Mr.

[16] Toor states that the perpetrators had i dentified themselves as members of the Inter Service Intelligence (‘ ISI’), therefore, we enquired whether ISI was contacted and were told that a letter was written to the Ministry of Defence, and that a response is awaited. This depicts incompetence in pu rsuing the investig ation .

[17] It is inexplicable why the investigator s did not contact the ISI , in respect of the crime which took place on 25 May 2021 and continue to await for a response to their letter. 5. We are dismayed with the manner in which the Police has been investigati ng these crimes against journalist s, the crimes were well orchestrated and presumably carried out on instructions , but this aspect Suo Mot u Case No., etc 5 appears not to have even been considered.

[18] The investigators by their apparent incompetence have und ermined their own credibility. The Inspector General of Police is in attendance and states that he too is not satisfied and will be substituting the investigation team with competent officers. We also expect that once discernible photograph(s) of the abdu ctors of Mr.

[19] Matiullah Jan and sketches of all the three intruders into the residence of Mr. Toor have been prepared they will be published in one Urdu and one English newspapers published from Islamabad having wide circulation and a reward offered for inf ormation and for identifying th e culprits. 6. Constitution Petition No. : Notices were issued on 2 April 2024 to the six petitioners because discrepancies were noted and they were directed to be in attendance.

[20] Three of the petitioners are present , namely, Raja Sher Bilal, Professor Ibrar Ahmad and Mr. M. Asif, Advocate and state that their names have been misused as they did not instruct the filing of the petition, nor had filed it. Therefore, t hey were shown their purported signatures on th e power of attorney of the Advocate -on-Record (‘AOR’), namely, the late Mr.

[21] Ahmed Nawaz Ch. , and they state that the y did not sign it nor are the same their signatures. After the passing of late Mr. Ahmed Nawaz Ch., the petitioner s statedly engaged the ser vices of Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah as their AOR but the said petitioners also den y engag ing him. We have seen their original CNICs to compare their signatures thereon with the said power s and the same do not match. 7.

[22] Learned Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah states that the office of Mr. Haider Waheed had engaged him on behalf of the said petitioners. However , learned Mr. Haider Waheed denies this, and states that he was engaged by the late Mr. Ahmed Nawaz Ch. He further states that he never met any of the petit ioners and had only communicated with one of Suo Mot u Case No., etc 6 them namely, Mr.

[23] Qausain Faisal, Advocate. The filing of CP No.27 of 2022 has become a very serious mat ter, three of the six petitioners therein have completely dissociated themselves from it . And, the learned AOR and the learned ASC have contradict ed each other. We accordingly direct the learned AOR and the learned ASC to file their respective affidavits, which should also attend to the following: (1) Who had instructed them to file the petition; (2) Who had engaged th em; (3) Who drafted the petition, and where; (4) Who printed it for filing; (5) Who issued the requisite notices; (6) Who paid their fees, and how; (7) Proof of dispatch of drafts, that is, through email, WhatsApp, Courier , or by other means; (8) Proof of communication with any o f the petitioners, including with Mr.

[24] Qausain Faisal , and (9) Costs, including travel and board, incurred and who paid the same . 8. The Process Server ’s reports states that when he went to serve Mr. Qausain Faisal, Advocate a lady came out of the residen ce and took the notice but refuse d to sign the receipt thereof . Therefore, we repeat notice to Mr.

[25] Qausain Faisal which should also be sent to him through the District Bar Association , Rawalpindi , and since he is an ASC the office of this Court shall also inform him. He is directed to be in attendance on the next date of hearing. The address of Mr. Hassan Mahmood , another petitioner , was noted by the Process Server to be incorrect .

[26] Since Mr. Hassan Mahmood is shown to be a former Joint Secretary of the Cabinet Division he be served through the Government of Pakistan. Syed Ibn -e- Hussain , the petitioner No.1 , is shown to be a former Inspector General of Police , and had received the notice , but he is not in attendance. Let notice be issued to him to show cause why despite service he is not in attendance and to state whether he ha d instructed the filing of Suo Mot u Case No., etc 7 Constitution Petition No.27 of 2022, and if he did so, who did he instruct .

[27] He is directed to be in attendance personally at Islamabad or through video -link fr om the Lahore Registry of this Court. Copy of the order passed today to accompany the notices . 9. Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed points out that the Government has set up a National Cyber Crime Investigation Agency. We enquired from the learned AAG whether this is so and the learned AAG confirms this and states that it has been done pursuant to S.R.O 626(I)/2024 which has enact ed the National Cyber Crime Investigation Agency (Establishment, Powers and Functions) Rules, 2024 pursuant to section 51 read with section 29 of the Prevention of Electronic Crime Act, 2016.

[28] Learned Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed seeks time to exam ine the same and consider whether it will require amending his petition. Needful be done before the next date of hearing. . 10. To come up after thirty da ys. ISLAMABAD 13.05.2024 Naseer Chief Justice Judge Judge Suo Mot u Case No., etc 8