Case No: S.M.C.3/2022
Case Title: Regarding Independent and Transparent Investigation into the Murder of Renowned Journalist, Mr. Arshad Sharif in Kenya v.
Subject: U/A 184(3)
Judge: Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial
Judgment Date: 05-01-2023
Upload Date: 06-01-2023
Citations: NA
SC Citations: 2023 SCP 5
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/s.m.c._3_2022_06012023.pdf

[1] ORDER Today, the learned Attorney General for Pakistan has referred to two reports: one, an interim report filed by the Special Joint Investigation Team (“SJIT”) (CMA No.) and second, a report filed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs ( “MoFA” ) regarding the steps taken by it to expedite the investigation in Kenya and UAE (CMA No.).

[2] The learned Attorney SMC 3 of 2022 2 General also informed the Court that the Governments of Kenya and UAE, respectively are in the process of negotiating Mutual Legal Ass istance Agreements with the Federal Government. However, he stated that the execution of such agreements will take some time, therefore, an adjournment may be granted by the Court till the needful is done.

[3] The request appears reasonable and is allowed. 2. Next Mr. Saad Umar Buttar, learned counsel for the second wife of Mr. Arshad Sharif, gave the Court an account of the United Nation Rapporteurs and the United Nation Committees that are involved in investigating violations of human rights committed around the world.

[4] He stated that in case the Federal Government is unsuccessful in establishing direct communication with the Governments of Kenya and UAE then the said Rapporteurs and/or Committees may be approached for seeking their assistance into the inves tigation of the assassination of Mr. Arshad Sharif. 3. Lastly, Mr.

[5] Shaukat Aziz Siddiqui, learned counsel representing the mother of Mr. Arshad Sharif, referred to CMA No. filed on behalf of his client wherein he has shared the names of certain persons who his client suspects have knowledge regarding the conspirators and perpetrators involved in her son’s assassination.

[6] He requested the Court to direct the SJIT to examine the said persons. Having considered the request, the Court is of the considered view that the prayer of learned counsel is not maint ainable. The Court in the present Suo Motu is merely facilitating the investigation into the assassination of Mr. Arshad Sharif and it has no mandate to direct the course of investigation.

[7] Nevertheless, learned counsel may, if so inclined, approach the SMC 3 of 2022 3 SJIT for the stated purpose. CMA No. is disposed of in the above terms. 4. Re-list in July, 2023 . CHIEF JUSTICE JUDGE JUDGE JUDGE Islamabad 13.06.2023 Naseer/Meher LC JUDGE