Case No: S.M.C.18/2011
Case Title: (Suo Moto action regarding irregularities and non payment of salaries to the workers of Pakistan Railways)
Subject: Miscelleneous
Judge: Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry
Judgment Date: 30-11-2011
Upload Date: 01-12-2011
Citations: N/A
SC Citations: 2011 SCP 51
PDF URL: https://www.supremecourt.gov.pk/downloads_judgements/S.M.C.18of2011-ShortOrder-1.pdf

[1] ORDER Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ. — Sheikh Rashi d Ahmad, Former Minister for Pakistan Railways SMC  2 pointed out that after commencing hearin g of this case , 20 locomotives have been rehabilitated and are being used with railway trains. Former Minister has also referred the audit report of current year and read out different portions therefrom, according to which huge losses have been caused to the Railways on account of mismanagement, corruption and corrupt practices , etc.

[2] Surprisingly the concerned authorities have failed to initiate action against the persons responsible , till date . Mr. Shafiqullah, Secretary Railways Board stated that in add ition to it, 21 locomotives shall also be rehabilitated on or before 21st December, 2011 2. It may be noted that identical objection s in regard to corruption were raised on the last date of hearing in respect of auctioning of the scrape and we had directe d the Chairman NAB to look into this matter and initiate actions according to law.

[3] In respect of th e audit report as well, we direct the Chairman that he should collect the audit report from the Railways Department and examine the same to ascertain the cri minal liabilities of the officers/officials and other persons responsible for the corruption and corrupt practices. The l earned Attorney General for Pakistan as well as learned Additional Prosecutor General , NAB pointed out that in compliance with the orde rs of this Court, action has already been initiated by NAB . 3.

[4] Sardar Ayaz Sadiq, MNA, Chairman Standing Committee on Pakistan Railway s has appeared and stated that t here is no such serious problem with the Railways except the things are becoming compli cated for one or the other reason . He has pointed out that bailout packages have been issued and by the time 12 billions have been received by the Railway s Department but on account of mismanagement , no progress has been made for rehabilitation of Railways .

[5] One of the reasons pointed out SMC  3 by him was the non -functioning of the Railways Board. The Secretary Railways Board stated that about one year back Prime Minister of Pakistan had accorded approval of the Railway Board wherein names of some of the private persons had been mentioned but despite lapse of a sufficient time the Board has not been notified .

[6] He further stated that the Government should nominate such persons to be the member s of Board, who have no personal interest or stake and preference should be given to the persons who have expertise in the relative commercial business . The learned Attorney General has stated that he would discuss these issues with the Secretary Railways and on the next date of hearing shall inform the reasons for non -issuance o f the notification of the Railway Board. 4.

[7] The Secretary Railways Board further informed that out of available 494 locomotives 60% have already lived their lives, therefore, despite spending money on their repairs , no useful purpose can be obtained fro m the same. On the other hand Sheikh Rash id Ahmad has pointed out that majority of the engines are those, which have been parked for want of minor repairs, say like; in some of the cases on account of use of contaminated oil the crank shafts have been dama ged and minimum expenditures for replacement of crank shaft is required and if this procedure is adopted, the Railways can rehabilitate a good number of their engines.

[8] We do not have technical exper tise, however, we direct the Chairman that he should prepa re a list of each locomotive , pointing out the defects and the plan for its rehabilitation alongwith approximate cost of each locomotive . This exercise should be completed within a period of ten days and copy of the same shall be sent to the Registrar as w ell as Sh eikh Rashid Ahmad, Former Minister, Railways.

[9] The Registrar shall convene a meeting of Former Minister and representatives/engineers of HMC, HIT and